university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
scope:
this policy applies to undergraduate students enrolled in the school of arts & sciences, robins school of
business, and jepson school of leadership studies at the university of richmond.
index:
acd-1602.1 ......policy
policy statement:
acd-1602.1 ......policy
g
ood standing
full-time students are considered to be in good standing at the end of a semester if, in that semester
(including a semester abroad), they have
• c
ompleted at least 3.5 units of course work, and
• earned a minimum term gpa of 1.8
in addition, full-time students* must meet the following minimum thresholds in order to enter their third,
fifth, and seventh semesters in good standing:
policy #: acd-1602 policy title: academic progress
effective: 08/28/2023 responsible office: registrar's office
date
approved:
04/14/2023 approval: executive vice president and provost
replaces
policy dated:
04/04/2020 responsible
university official:
university registrar

acd-1602 – academic progress
university of richmond | 2
good standing
requirements for
students cumulative gpa
earned units
(including units earned
through transfer and
advanced standing) other
entering 3rd semester 1.8 6.86 completion of fys
requirement
entering 5th semester 1.9 14
declaration of major
entering 7th semester 2.0 25 declaration of major
in rare instances, students who are unable to complete their degree within eight semesters may return for a
ninth or subsequent semester only with permission in advance from the college dean. such students must have
a minimum 2.0 cumulative gpa and a viable plan for degree completion to return in good standing.
institutional financial aid is limited to eight semesters of enrollment.
academic deficiencies
academic deficiencies are of two types: academic probation and withdrawn for academic reasons.
academic reports are evaluated at the end of each grade-posting period. regardless of the specific provisions
for each school stated below, if at the end of any term a student's record reveals such significant deterioration
in performance that extraordinary action is deemed appropriate by the dean of the student's college, that
student may be placed on academic probation, limited in units of enrollment, or withdrawn for academic
reasons, regardless of grade point average. in addition, such student may be restricted from participation in
certain university activities.
students with three or more incompletes (punitive or non-punitive) but otherwise meeting
academic progress requirements are not in good standing. to return to good standing, students
must remedy the incompletes according to the terms of their academic probation as determined by the college
dean.
academic probation
a student who falls below the minimum accumulations of semester units and/or grade point average (gpa)
for good standing will be placed automatically on academic probation. academic probation includes
continued enrollment at the university with a clearly outlined plan, developed in concert with the dean, to
improve performance and return to good standing.

acd-1602 – academic progress
university of richmond | 3
withdrawn for academic reasons
if at the end of the semester of enrollment after being placed on academic probation, the student fails to meet
the minimum standard to return to good standing, the student will be withdrawn for academic reasons. at
least one full fall or spring term must elapse before a student withdrawn for academic reasons is eligible for
readmission. in addition, a student is withdrawn for academic reasons:
• may not enroll in a fall or spring term at the university during the period of academic withdrawal
• may not enroll in a summer term at the university without permission of the dean
• must apply for readmission
the above provisions notwithstanding, the dean of the student's college, in circumstances which seem to
warrant such action, may allow the student to continue as a full-time student on academic probation for a
single additional semester.
a second withdrawal for academic reasons will typically result in academic dismissal, and the student
would be ineligible for readmission.
appeals
students not meeting requirements for good standing may appeal their withdrawal for academic reasons, in
writing, to the executive vice president and provost. the deadline for appeals is the earlier of 1) three
business days prior to the start of the term in which they plan to enroll, or 2) 30 days from the notification of
their withdrawal for academic reasons. a student's request must include information regarding why the
student is not meeting the standards for good standing and what factors have changed that will allow the
student's academic progress to improve by the next evaluation. the provost's response to the student appeal is
final and cannot be appealed.
jepson school of leadership studies
a student will be placed on academic probation when the student's leadership studies gpa falls below 2.0 or
the student earns a grade below c- (1.7) in a leadership studies course. while on academic probation, a
student's participation in athletics, debating, dramatic or musical organizations, as well as their representation
of the university in any public capacity, may be restricted.
if the student does not meet academic standards in the following semester, he or she will be dismissed from
the program in leadership studies. the student may request a one-semester extension of the probationary
status. the appeal should be directed to associate dean for academic affairs of the jepson school of
leadership studies. if granted and the student does not meet all standards after the probationary year, he or
she will be dismissed from the program in leadership studies. any further appeals should be directed to the
dean of the jepson school of leadership studies. upon review of the student's record and any additional
information, the dean will render a final decision.

acd-1602 – academic progress
university of richmond | 4
readmission to the university
students who have withdrawn from the university for whatever reason, other than participating in an
approved study abroad, exchange, or visiting away program, and wish to return must make their request for
readmission in writing by the deadline, typically february 15 for readmission for the summer or fall terms and
october 1 for readmission to the spring term. applications for readmission will be evaluated by a committee
including the richmond and westhampton college deans, the senior associate registrar, the avp and director
of financial aid, and the relevant associate dean from the jepson school of leadership studies or the robins
school of business, for students who are majoring in that school.
to be readmitted after being withdrawn for academic reasons, a student must:
• meet any requirements outlined by the dean, which can include successful completion of a course(s) in
summer term or elsewhere to improve a student's academic standing, so long as such transfer credits are
consistent with the university's transfer credit policy;
• submit an application for readmission that demonstrates to the satisfaction of the committee that the
issues that resulted in inadequate academic performance have been addressed and academic poor
performance is unlikely to recur; and
• demonstrate that graduation is possible and articulate an academic pathway for return to good standing.
deadline for completion of non-punitive incompletes
incompletes that need to be completed in order to return to good standing for the fall semester
in a class other than an fys, must have all required work submitted no later than july 15.
grades for such work must be turned in no later than august 1.
any incomplete in an fys that needs to be completed in order to return to return to good
standing for the fall semester must have all required work submitted no later than june 1. in
such cases, the grade must be turned in no later than june 15. students who fail to complete the
fys with a passing grade by the deadline will be required to enroll in a new fys.
incompletes that need to be completed in order to return to good standing for the spring
semester, including an incomplete from a prior semester due to an exam or other project that
must be completed on campus, must have all required work submitted no later than september
30. grades for such work must be turned in no later than october 15.
related policies:
enm-1101 - satisfactory academic progress: undergraduate students in the schools of arts & sciences,
business, and leadership studies

acd-1602 – academic progress
university of richmond | 5
policy background:
policy dated august 1, 2019 was reviewed by academic and president's cabinets prior to final approval and
approved by university faculty senate on november 16, 2018. this replaced the policy dated august 1,
2018.
modification to deadline for appeal reviewed by faculty senate on april 3, 2020 prior to approval and
effective date of april 4, 2020. this policy replaces policy dated august 1, 2019.
modification to incomplete deadline, ninth semester requirements, accumulation of incompletes, completion
of fys, and seventh semester earned units reviewed by faculty senate on april 14, 2023 prior to approval
and effective date of august 28, 2023. this policy replaces policy dated april 3, 2020.
non substantive edits made on december 7, 2023 regarding deadlines.
policy contacts:
university registrar