university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right
to elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
index:
irm-2001.1…..definitions
irm-2001.2 .......policy statement
irm-2001.3 .......applicable regulations & accreditation standards
policy statement:
irm-2001.1 – definitions
user – any individual, including but not limited to faculty, student, staff, contractors, visitors; who access
and use university information resources or data.
irm-2001.1 – policy statement
1. responsible use of university information and computing resources
all members of the university of richmond community who use the university's computing and network
facilities must use them in an ethical, responsible, and legal manner. this means that individuals are
personally responsible for their use of these resources. individuals must be familiar with and follow all
university and information services policies. an attempt to engage in a prohibited activity is considered a
violation whether the attempt is successful or not.
policy #: irm-2001 policy title: acceptable use policy
effective: 04/28/2020 responsible office: information services
date
approved:
04/27/2020
approval: vice president for information services
and chief information officer
replaces
policy dated:
2/3/2017 responsible
university official:
vice president for information services
and chief information officer

irm-2001 – acceptable use policy
university of richmond | 2
the university's network and computer infrastructure is a critical and finite resource. community
members rely on high availability and good performance in order to accomplish their work. systems using
excessive amounts of bandwidth, causing network disruption, or are deemed to be a security and/or
privacy risk may be disconnected from the network or otherwise limited without warning. if the network
event is related to faculty research, is will attempt to contact the faculty member to resolve the issue
before taking the resource offline. information services may employ automated systems that partition or
restrict network bandwidth, protocols, or access either internally or at the internet gateway.
the university does not monitor or generally restrict the content of material traversing the university's
networks or stored on university managed or contracted systems and devices. the university reserves the
right to remove or limit access to material posted on university-owned or administered systems and
networks when university policies, contractual obligations, or state as well as federal laws are violated.
the university provides computers, software, and network equipment for use by the university
community. the university retains ownership and reserves the right to add, remove, upgrade, and replace
hardware or software on those systems as deemed necessary by information services. in those cases
where hardware and/or software was obtained by faculty to support their research, information services
will work with that faculty member to review available mitigations.
members of the university of richmond community must:
• use resources supplied for purposes that are consistent with the business and mission of the
university of richmond.
• limit personal use of university computing and storage resources to ensure availability of
resources for the business and mission of the university.
• use the university's computing facilities and information resources, including hardware, software
and computer accounts, responsibly and appropriately.
• respect the rights and property of others.
• comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws as well as university policies.
• comply with all contractual and license agreements.
• accept personal responsibility for the proper use of individual accounts and all activity associated
with them.
• safeguard equipment entrusted to them.
members of the university of richmond may not:
• share accounts, passwords, or other computer or network authentication. information services
may grant authorization for group or organization accounts when there is a need. see computing
accounts at the university of richmond.
• use any means to view or intercept data or network traffic not intended for their viewing or use.
• view, copy, disclose, or modify any files or data that do not belong to them, or to which they do
not have specific permission.
• use computing or network resources to harass, threaten, or otherwise cause harm to others.

irm-2001 – acceptable use policy
university of richmond | 3
• use the university's computing resources for commercial or personal purposes not related to the
university's business operations, academic, research, and scholarly pursuits.
• use any it systems in a way which suggests university endorsement of any political party,
candidate, or ballot initiative. this includes e-mailing political messages to any list service
maintained by the university which is not explicitly purposed for the posting of political messages.
• interfere with the proper functioning of the university of richmond wired or wireless network. in
particular users may not perform service denial attacks and users may not install their own network
equipment on campus. see the wireless access policy.
• use university of richmond it systems to distribute, produce, publish, and/or sell obscene or
illegal content.
2. information security and privacy
the university takes information security and privacy very seriously for all of its members as well as all
of its systems.
the university is the owner of all administrative data; individual units or departments have stewardship
responsibilities for portions of that data. information maintained on university systems is a vital asset that
will be available only to those who have a legitimate business need to access it in order to conduct
university business. the university does not allow the use of administrative data for anything but the
conduct of university business. employees accessing data must observe requirements for confidentiality
and privacy, must comply with protection and control procedures, and must accurately present the data in
any use.
members of the university of richmond community must:
• read and agree to abide by the university's data security policy.
• be personally responsible for the security and usage of any system connected to the university of
richmond network, not owned by the university of richmond. find information on connecting
your computer.
• choose passwords that meet university standards and keep their passwords secure. see the
password policy. do not use the password that you choose for your university of richmond
accounts with other off-campus services such as social media, streaming platforms, shopping, etc.
as the privacy of your password may not be protected outside the university's network.
• report unauthorized use of your accounts to your supervisor or the director of information
security. if you discover a possible security issue related to university systems report the problem
immediately by calling 289-8655 or emailing abuse@richmond.edu.
• use only those computers and computer accounts for which you have authorization. if you need
additional privileges or access contact the help desk or appropriate system administrator with
your request.
• comply with requests from information services. information services' staff will conduct periodic
security checks on systems and networks. individuals may be asked to change their password,

irm-2001 – acceptable use policy
university of richmond | 4
upgrade software, apply a patch or perform some other action to improve system security. non-
compliance may result in termination of access.
• when displaying or publishing photos on web pages or other public forums you have a
responsibility not to compromise the privacy of individuals who are identifiable in those photos.
as a rule, photo releases are not required for candid photos taken in public areas. however, a page
owner or publisher should immediately remove any photo if the subject of the photo objects to its
use and requests its removal.
members of the university of richmond may not:
• disguise or attempt to disguise their identity or the identity of their account or the machine that
they are using. users may not attempt to impersonate another person or computing system account.
the use of aliases or nicknames associated with your account in systems where those are
commonly used is not considered a disguise and is not prohibited.
• attempt to gain unauthorized access to any account or system.
• create or use any program or electronic form that collects account names, passwords or personally
identifiable information about individuals without the direct knowledge, approval and assistance of
information services.
• copy, report or distribute any personally identifiable, sensitive or confidential data or files to
which you as a user of university resources are not authorized or gain inadvertent access. users
must report any occurrences to the data owner or to the director of information security.
the foregoing is not an all-inclusive list; the university reserves the right to determine what uses of its
equipment and facilities fall within the bounds of the business and mission of the university. report
abuses of information or computing resources to the appropriate information services administrator or to
epolicy@richmond.edu.
3. e-mail and other electronic communications
e-mail, text messaging, instant messaging, and other applications are used by most members of the
university community. however, all users should understand the limitations of privacy and confidentiality
related to them. they should not be used for confidential communication or the transmission of sensitive
data. see the university's data security policy for additional information.
e-mail messages are written records that could be subject to review with just cause. e-mail records and
information in electronic form on central computers can be subpoenaed. messages that the user has
deleted may still exist on system's backup media for weeks or months.
certain types of e-mail and uses of e-mail or other forms of electronic communications are prohibited;
these include chain letters, obscene messages, harassing messages, and unsolicited political messages. e-
mail that violates any university policy or is otherwise used for an illegal purpose is prohibited.
all e-mail sent through the university's systems and networks must accurately show from whom the e-
mail originated.
the university may employ automated systems to reduce the amount of unwanted "junk" mail. it is
known that this may on occasion reject a valid e-mail.

irm-2001 – acceptable use policy
university of richmond | 5
spiderbytes should be used for conveying messages to a large number of recipients. spiderbytes is a
message forum for university of richmond students, faculty and staff to exchange important information
regarding university business and campus-wide events. do not e-mail large lists through outlook.
4. observing the digital millennium copyright act, and protecting intellectual property and
copyright
copyright is a form of protection of intellectual property provided by the laws of the united states to the
authors of original works. copyright is an issue of particular seriousness because technology now allows
the easy copying and transmission of some protected works.
it is the responsibility of all students, faculty, and staff at the university of richmond to understand and
comply with the university's policy regarding the digital millennium copyright act. the university's
designated agent for notices under the digital millennium copyright act is the head of scholarly
communications in boatwright memorial library. federal copyright laws also protect the software
available for use on computers at the university of richmond. the software provided through the
university for use by faculty, staff, and students may be used only on computing equipment as specified
in the various software licenses.
faculty, staff, or students must not copy or reproduce any licensed software or intellectual property found
on university computing equipment, except as expressly permitted by the software license, author, or
granting authority. faculty, staff, and students may not use unauthorized copies of licensed software on
university-owned computers.
5. problem resolution and policy violations
in cases where a member of the university community has allegedly committed a policy violation, broken
a law, or is causing harm to the information infrastructure; information services may immediately revoke
access privileges pending the outcome of a full review of the alleged violation. whenever possible, the
individual will be notified by phone, electronic, campus or u.s. mail of the alleged violation. a
representative of the information services staff will contact the person to propose a meeting to discuss the
alleged violation.
depending on the nature of the alleged offense, information services may contact the appropriate senior
university administrator (director of human resources, dean, or vice president) or campus police
alerting them of the alleged violation and conferring on the appropriate next steps. if the problem or issue
in question overlaps with another disciplinary or law enforcement process, information services will
coordinate with the appropriate office or agency. penalties for illegal activity or serious violations may be
as severe as suspension or dismissal from the university or criminal prosecution.
6. reporting abusive incidents, harassment or irresponsible behavior related to technology
if you are a victim of abusive incidents related to technology or you become aware of abusive use of
university technology resources, report the violation to the dean of your college, your supervisor,
campus police, or information services at epolicy@richmond.edu. sending a message to
epolicy@richmond.edu will alert a senior member of the information services staff to your situation.
keep copies of e-mail messages, a record of the time and date(s) of the occurrence, and all other
information related to the incident for investigative purposes.

irm-2001 – acceptable use policy
university of richmond | 6
irm-2001.2 – applicable regulations & accreditation standards
sacscoc principles of accreditation 10.6 distance and correspondence education
sacscoc principles of accreditation 12.5 student records
digital millennium copyright act of 1998
related policies:
information security policy
wireless access policy
data security policy
password policy
digital millennium copyright act policy
policy background:
initial policy approved june 29, 1999
revised to designate agent for digital millennium copyright act (dmca) may 18, 2010
integrated with data security policy march 13, 2014
revised for new dmca agent designation october 2, 2015
visitor wireless network added february 3, 2017
minor revisions in march 2020 reviewed by it governance committee and president's cabinet prior to
approval on april 27, 2020.
policy contacts:
vice president for information services and chief information officer
assistant vice president for systems and networks
director of information security
head of scholarly communications