university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
the university of richmond respects the privacy of electronic communications in the same way that it
respects the privacy of paper correspondence and telephone conversations. therefore, the university does not
routinely monitor or access the content of electronic communications, computer files, or voice mail whether
stored on university equipment or in transit on the university network. however, monitoring or access may be
necessary under certain circumstances. this policy outlines the legal or administrative circumstances under
which access and/or monitoring may occur.
scope:
this policy applies to faculty, staff, and student storage of email, voice mail, and data files maintained in
university approved information systems.
index:
irm-4008.1 .......definitions
irm-4008.2…...policy statement
irm-4008.3…...applicable regulations and accreditation standards
policy statement:
irm-4008.1 – definitions
user – any individual, including but not limited to faculty, student, staff, contractors, and visitors who has
access and uses university information resources, systems, or data.
policy #: irm-4008 policy title: access to electronic files policy
effective: 02/04/2021 responsible office: information services
date
approved:
02/04/2021
approval: vice president for information services and
chief information officer
replaces
policy dated:
05/04/2006 responsible
university official:
vice president for information services and
chief information officer

irm-4008 – access to electronic files policy
university of richmond | 2
irm-4008.2 – policy statement
the university of richmond owns and provides email, voice, storage, and other electronic services to
authorized users to facilitate the university's business and academic mission. these electronic resources are
deployed and maintained by information services to support the university's work of teaching, scholarship,
research, administration, and public service. incidental and occasional personal use of email and other
electronic resources is allowed; however, the university may access such content as described in this policy.
information services monitors and collects data related to the university's systems and networks as necessary
to manage the campus network traffic and to ensure that resources are available for academic, scholarly, and
administrative uses. designated information services personnel, such as system administrators, have special
privileges necessary for the implementation and maintenance of the university's systems and networks. the
number of information services staff with system administrator privileges for any given system is limited to
the number required for reliable operation, cross training, and adequate support coverage.
conditions under which email may be monitored and accessed
while efforts are made to ensure reasonable expectations of privacy to users' email and electronic files, the
university may inspect, monitor, or disclose the contents under the following circumstances:
1. system administration when managing email and file systems, system administrators primarily deal
with system logs, application files, and email headers. information services personnel may not
intentionally access the content of email or stored files without the permission of the account holder
unless there is a situation that threatens the actual operation of the system. occasionally, however,
because of the way the systems identify and handle problems, information services personnel may not
avoid observing the contents of email and other files. these personnel shall peruse these emails and/or
stored files as little as possible in order to perform the necessary task. if information services staff
must access user content, they shall treat the information or content with strict confidentiality and
notify the account holder of the incident, except in the case where it is evidence for violations of the
law or written university policy.
2. legal compliance the university complies with all valid court orders or other orders with which the
university must comply by law. these orders may include preservation, inspection, monitoring,
and/or disclosure of email and/or stored files university counsel and the account holder shall be
notified of these actions, unless the order obligates non-disclosure.
3. emergency situations the university may access electronic files or email when access or disclosure
is needed to prevent the likelihood of imminent significant harm to persons or property. even though
the situation is deemed an emergency, authorization shall still be sought from the appropriate official
in consultation with the senior associate vice president for human resources or their designee. for
faculty accounts the appropriate university official is the dean of the faculty member; for staff
accounts the appropriate university official is the vice president of the staff's division; for student
accounts the appropriate university official is the registrar. notification of the actions taken shall be
given to the account holder; but depending on the emergency and circumstances, notification may not
occur until after the situation is resolved. in the event the dean or vice president is not readily
available to provide approval, the requestor may defer to the executive vice president/provost for
faculty or the executive vice president/chief operating officer for staff.
4. other compelling circumstances

irm-4008 – access to electronic files policy
university of richmond | 3
a. the vice president for information services will respond to requests from university counsel
and the university auditor to preserve information necessary for pending or anticipated
litigation or investigations. when directed, the preserved information may be reviewed by
counsel or the auditor without the permission of the account holder.
b. an appropriate university official with notification of university counsel may request
preservation of email and/or stored files in the event of substantial reason to believe that
violations of law or written university policy have occurred. for faculty accounts the
appropriate university official is the provost; for staff accounts the appropriate university
official is the associate vice president of human resources; for student accounts the
appropriate university official is the registrar.
c. in the circumstance when access to stored files or email is necessary to conduct university
business and the employee is no longer working at the university or cannot be contacted, an
appropriate university official may authorize access to an employee's email account or
electronic files. for faculty accounts the appropriate university official is the dean of the
faculty member; for staff accounts the appropriate university official is the vice president of
the staff's division. in the event the dean or vice president is not readily available to provide
approval, the requestor may defer to the executive vice president/provost or the executive
vice president/chief operating officer for staff. this access of stored files or email shall be
reported to active employees once they are able to be contacted.
notification and record maintenance – information services shall keep a record of all incidents which
require the observation of email content. observing only email system logs or email headers will not require
an entry in this record. entries shall include the email account id, the date, the is staff member's name, and a
brief explanation.
preservation of email – users of the university's electronic mail system should be aware that, even though
the sender and recipient have discarded their copies of a particular email, back-up copies of discarded email
exist for a while, and can be retrieved if necessary. systems are routinely "backed up" to protect system
reliability and integrity as well as to prevent potential loss of data. the back-up process results in the copying
of data onto storage media that may be retained for periods of time and in locations unknown to the originator
or recipient of the email.
no guarantee of confidentiality – information services staff follow sound professional practices in
providing for the security of the email, data, application programs, and system programs under their control.
however, in today's environment professional practices and protections are not infallible and the security and
confidentiality of our systems and data cannot be guaranteed. in addition, the recipient of an email message
may forward it to persons who were not intended to see it. users, therefore, should exercise extreme caution
in using email to communicate confidential or sensitive matters.

irm-4008 – access to electronic files policy
university of richmond | 4
irm-4008.3 – applicable regulations and accreditation standards
a. red flags rule of the fair and accurate credit transaction act of 2003 (fact act), public law 108-
159, section 114
b. family educational rights and privacy act (ferpa) (20 u.s.c. § 1232g; 34 cfr part 99)
c. health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 (hipaa), public law 104-191
d. payment card industry data security standard (pci dss)
e. sacscoc principles of accreditation 10.6 (distance and correspondence education)
related policies:
a. information security policy
b. acceptable use policy
c. data security policy
policy background:
initial policy created may 4, 2006
revision history added may 18, 2010
added deans and vps as approvers for user files access; evps as alternates. reviewed by it governance
committee and president's cabinet prior to approval. dec 18, 2020
revised version approved by vice president for information services and chief information officer feb 4,
2021
policy contacts:
vice president for information services and chief information officer
director of information security
assistant vice president for systems and networks
assistant vice president for telecommunications, media support, user services, and academic computing
services