university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the
right to elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
index:
hrm-5007.1 .....policy
hrm-5007.2 .....types of additional compensation
policy statement:
hrm-5007.1 – policy
from time to time, it may be necessary for employees to take on responsibilities that are distinctly separate
from or significantly in addition to their primary position. appropriate additional compensation for the nature
of these assignments will be determined by human resources in consultation with the employee's manager
and on a case-by-case basis.
an exempt employee, by the nature of their position, is considered to be available for work assignments
without additional remuneration at times other than their regularly scheduled hours. however, there are
circumstances when additional compensation may be appropriate when the additional work is significantly
over and above the employee's job responsibilities or distinct and separate from those duties.
policy #: hrm-5007
policy title: policy on additional compensation for staff
effective: 01/01/2024 responsible office: human resources
date
approved:
12/05/2023 approval: executive vice president and chief operating
officer
replaces
policy dated:
pre-2010 responsible
university official:
chief human resources officer

hrm-5007 – policy on additional compensation for staff
university of richmond | 2
a non-exempt employee who takes on additional duties will be paid for all hours worked. if a change to their
hourly rate is approved by human resources as the method of additional compensation, the new rate must be
paid on all hours worked, including overtime.
additional compensation will not be provided for participation in professional development activities.
additional compensation is paid through the department's budget. the employee must have any necessary
qualifications for the temporary duties assigned.
the performance of work outside an employee's regular duties or department must not conflict with or reduce
effectiveness of the employee's performance of their primary position responsibilities.
a supervisor must consult with an hr business partner before establishing payment or committing to pay an
employee for additional duties.
all decisions regarding the appropriateness of additional compensation or secondary jobs must be approved
by human resources.
hrm-5007.2 – types of additional compensation
there are four different methods for compensating additional work.
performing work of a vacant position (acting/interim)
additional compensation for a staff member who temporarily assumes responsibility for, and performance of,
another position in addition to their primary position responsibilities. approved compensation for acting or
interim work will be considered when calculating pay for benefits.
one-time payments for project or supplemental work
additional compensation for work performed that is distinctly different and unrelated to the employee's
primary position and that occurs within a short period of time. one-time payments for a project or
supplemental work is not considered when calculating benefits.
secondary positions
additional compensation for work that is being performed on an ongoing basis and is distinctly separate from
and unrelated to an employee's primary position. if an employee's primary job is full-time, approved
compensation for a secondary position will not be considered when calculating pay for benefits. if an
employee's primary job is part-time, approved compensation for a secondary position will be considered
when calculating pay for benefits.
a one-time bonus
additional compensation for accomplishing extraordinary and above normal expectations of the basic duties
of the job. bonus compensation is not considered when calculating benefits.
performing work of a vacant position (acting/interim)
supervisors may request an acting/interim rate or a lump sum payment for a staff member who temporarily
assumes responsibility for, and performance of, another position in addition to their primary position
responsibilities.

hrm-5007 – policy on additional compensation for staff
university of richmond | 3
typically, the other position is at a higher level/scope than their current position and in addition to their
primary position responsibilities.
• typically, an acting/interim assignment has a specific beginning and ending date and does not exceed
a period of six months.
• supervisors/managers cannot receive additional compensation for performing the work of an
employee who reports to them.
• the rate associated with an interim or acting position will depend on the amount and complexity of the
additional responsibilities assigned to the staff member.
• the individual performing the duties may assume the title of "acting" or "interim" at the request of
the supervisor.
factors considered when determining interim pay
• level of additional responsibilities
• current salary relative to midpoint of acting/interim position grade
• current salary relative to others in similar jobs in acting/interim grade (with similar skills, knowledge,
competencies, and experience)
• depth and breadth of skills and knowledge of the individual assuming the interim position.
one-time payments for project or supplemental work
typically, one-time payments are appropriate for work performed that is distinctly different and unrelated to
the employee's primary position that occurs within a short period of time or irregularly.
typically, non-exempt staff will be paid their hourly rate for any additional work. if, in rare circumstances, it
is determined that a non-exempt employee is eligible to receive a one-time payment, they must also be
compensated for any work over 40 hours in a work week. this must be at a rate of at least one and one-half
their base rate and as part of regular payroll regardless of the nature or exemption status of the work
performed.
secondary jobs
an employee may be compensated for work unrelated to and distinctly separate from their primary job.
secondary jobs can be utilized for employees working two part-time jobs or one full-time job and a part-time
job. secondary jobs can be regular staff positions, temporary positions, or on-call positions. employees
performing work in a secondary job should be compensated based on position level, an employee's skill,
knowledge and experience as well as internal equity.
secondary job guidelines vary depending on the fair labor standards act exemption status and are as
follows:
non-exempt
all non-exempt secondary jobs must be paid hourly and not on a salary basis. employees have a duty to
report that they are accepting a secondary job to their primary job supervisor prior to beginning work.
• if the employee has two part-time positions, one will be designated as primary, the other as secondary.
• if the employee has a full-time position, it is designated as the primary position.
• in either case, the department funding the secondary position is responsible for any overtime pay for
work over 40 hours per week.

hrm-5007 – policy on additional compensation for staff
university of richmond | 4
• employees may not hold two positions resulting in more than 60 hours of scheduled work per week
note: blended rates for overtime will be used when an employee has two jobs that are compensated at
different pay rates.
exempt
when an employee is in an exempt position and performs additional exempt-level duties on a regular basis
that are unrelated to, and distinctly different from their primary position, this is considered a secondary
position. the hr business partner should be consulted to determine the appropriate amount of pay based on
the level and nature of work performed.
staff compensation for instructing academic courses
a staff employee whose position does not include teaching responsibilities may be allowed to teach up to one
undergraduate or graduate course per term and a total of two courses per year with approval from their vp or
dean. the staff member must have the appropriate academic qualifications for teaching (acd-7201
academic and professional preparation requirements for faculty) and their teaching must be evaluated by
the hiring school by the same method used to evaluate adjunct instructors. compensation for this additional
work should be similar to that of an adjunct faculty for comparable instruction.
one-time bonus
the goal of the university of richmond staff bonus plan is to provide a one-time bonus to staff members
who have accomplished extraordinary achievement(s) within the workplace. it is designed to provide a
financial reward to a select few who have outperformed and exceeded expectations during the year.
eligibility
all staff (exempt and non-exempt) are eligible. faculty, student employees, contract staff, and temporary
employees are not eligible to participate.
criteria
eligible employees may be considered for a bonus based on the following criteria:
• employee contribution had a significant impact on university or department objectives.
• employee performed significantly above and beyond expectations on a specific project.
• employee went above and beyond the normal responsibilities required by their position.
• employee assumed added responsibilities in the short term to address a "gap" in the organization.
the performance of the staff member must be extraordinary, above normal expectations, and beyond the basic
functions of their job. extraordinary achievement may be indicated by a single noteworthy action or a
succession of extra efforts accomplished over a period of time. the written recommendation must be specific
and quantify exactly the effort and the outcome.
nomination process
a staff member may be nominated by any richmond staff or faculty member. nominations will be reviewed
by the employee's supervisor, department head and vice president.
bonus award

hrm-5007 – policy on additional compensation for staff
university of richmond | 5
• bonuses may be awarded throughout the year based on events/situations.
• bonuses are a one-time cash award.
related policies:
acd-7201 academic and professional preparation requirements for faculty
policy background:
the january 2024 revision updates this policy that has been in place prior to 2010. reviewed in president's
cabinet september 18, 2023; final version approved by evp & coo on december 5, 2023.
policy contacts:
chief human resources officer