university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
the purpose of this policy is to:
1. facilitate assignment of appropriate access to and responsibility for university data used for official
educational, administrative, and financial data input, reporting, and dissemination.
2. establish a standard and structure for data stewardship and ownership.
scope:
this policy applies to the university and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term "affiliates"
means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right to elect the
majority of the entity's governing board.
index:
irm-4007.1 .......definitions
irm-4007.2…...policy statement
irm-4007.3 .......roles and responsibilities
irm-4007.4…...applicable regulations and accreditation standards
policy #: irm-4007
policy title: administrative data management
policy
effective: 05/01/2023 responsible office: information services
date
approved:
04/17/2023 approval: vice president for information services and chief
information officer
replaces
policy dated:
08/01/2020 responsible
university official:
vice president for information services and chief
information officer

irm-4007 – administrative data management policy
university of richmond | 2
policy statement:
irm-4007.1 – definitions
administrative data: data that is gathered, produced, stored, and/or disseminated concerning any aspect of
the university's operations. such data includes, but is not limited to, general ledger/accounting, human
capital management, student, alumni/development, space management, student housing data, and also
includes any data derived from the use of such data. administrative data specifically does not include faculty
generated classroom data nor faculty- or student-generated research data.
data classification: details and examples of university data classification levels are contained in the
university's data security policy. university data is classified as: confidential, restricted, official use only,
or public.
data stewardship domain: a university administrative or operational area, function or process and the
authoritative data elements created, collected, and managed by that area throughout the lifecycle of that data,
regardless of the transactional system(s) in which they reside (e.g., finance data).
system-of-record: an information storage system that is the authoritative data source for a given data
element or piece of information (e.g., banner).
transactional system: an information processing system involving the collection, modification and retrieval
of data, as contrasted with systems used solely for analytics or reporting. (e.g., slate).
irm-4007.2 – policy statement
1. university ownership of administrative data – administrative data is owned by the university of
richmond. as such, all members of the university community have the obligation to appropriately use
and safeguard the data, in all formats and in all locations.
a. to the extent possible, administrative data should be collected and stored with common
definitions, and consistent formats and data entry standards to foster data accuracy and
consistency in reporting and data integration, (e.g., consistency in country codes in student and
alumni applications).
b. administrative data must be safeguarded to maintain the confidentiality and privacy of
personally identified and personally identifiable information in accordance with university
policies.
2. data classification – administrative data is categorized as confidential, restricted, official use only
or public following the university's data security policy and must be safeguarded appropriately.
3. access and confidentiality – access to university administrative data is based on the business needs
of the university and should enhance the ability of the university to achieve its mission. employees
shall have access to the administrative data needed to perform their official responsibilities.

irm-4007 – administrative data management policy
university of richmond | 3
individually identifiable data shall be available to the extent necessary to perform administrative tasks;
unit record data will be provided only when aggregate data or other alternatives cannot effectively meet
the business need. the data management committee is responsible for ensuring that procedures are
developed by functional offices to address those cases in which a member of the university community
seeks permission to access administrative data beyond that which is needed for the normal
performance of their duties.
because no computer system is completely immune from unauthorized access or attempted access
(e.g., "hacking"), applying layered security controls (e.g., multiple levels of access permissions) will
better safeguard university computers and our ever-expanding body of administrative data, which is
often sensitive. in order that the proper controls are applied, it is the responsibility of each person
accessing administrative data to:
a. know the classification of the administrative data being used.
b. follow the appropriate security measures.
c. consult related policies for further information.
specific policies implementing data access and security, including those developed by functional areas
shall be reviewed by the data management committee to ensure consistency with this policy.
4. training – before an individual is permitted access to administrative data in any form, training in the
use and attributes of the data, functional area data policies, and university policies regarding data is
strongly encouraged. the data stewards shall establish the appropriate levels of training for all such
individuals within their units.
5. integrity, validation, and correction – administrative data must be safeguarded and managed in all
formats and media (e.g., print and digital), at all points of access, and in all locations (both on-campus
and off-campus) through coordinated efforts and shared responsibilities. each data steward shall be
responsible for developing a plan for their functional area to assess the risk of erroneous or inconsistent
data and indicate how such administrative data, if found, will be corrected. the data management
committee will be responsible for ensuring that each functional area uses that plan to develop and
implement processes for identifying and correcting erroneous or inconsistent data.
6. extraction, manipulation, and reporting – extraction, manipulation, and reporting of administrative
data must be done only for university business purposes and consistent with this and other applicable
university policies. personal use of administrative data, in any format and at any location, is
prohibited. all data users are expected to be familiar with and conform to the university's
acceptable
use policy.
irm-4007.3 – roles and responsibilities
see exhibit 1 for data trustees and data stewards for each data stewardship domain.

irm-4007 – administrative data management policy
university of richmond | 4
data trustee – a senior university official (typically at the level of vice president or higher) who
oversees a data steward. data trustees are responsible for:
• the establishment of administrative data management policies and procedures
• approving all requests, whether new or changes, for agreements/partnerships involving sharing
university data from their data domain with third party vendors and ensuring these requests
follow the university's official it governance processes for review and approval
• assigning data management accountability to appropriate data stewards.
data steward – typically a senior operational manager in a functional area responsible for a data
stewardship domain. data stewards are responsible for all of the following for data within their data
stewardship domain:
• developing and documenting data standards
• documenting and annually updating data integrations and partnering with information services to
map third party data sources and destinations (effective may 1, 2024)
• establishing the business rules and business processes for their respective data stewardship
domains
• establishing the business rules and business processes for the transactional systems associated
with their data stewardship domain
• ensuring compliance with federal regulations, regional accreditation standards, and other rules
and regulations associated with management of the data in their data stewardship doman (e.g.,
gdpr, ferpa, glba, pci) and providing associated training
• ensuring data privacy (e.g., should we collect this data?) and data security (e.g., confidentiality)
• monitoring/overseeing data sharing (e.g., data exports, reporting, data integrations)
• adjudicating requests to access unit record or aggregate data within data stewardship domain
• complying with university records retention policy
• reviewing data access permissions annually
• understanding integrations and their impacts across related data stewardship domains
• partnering with information services to review and approve new systems or data integrations that
impact data
• acting as data ambassadors to communicate data and process changes • implementation of this
policy.
data supervisor – an individual who creates, stores, modifies or otherwise manages administrative data
within a data stewardship domain. data supervisors are responsible for:
• executing business and data processes related to administrative data
• maintaining and reinforcing, wherever possible, a uniform set of definitions for commonly
consumed data throughout the university (e.g., "enrolled student" should wherever possible have
the same meaning throughout the university).

irm-4007 – administrative data management policy
university of richmond | 5
data user – an individual who accesses administrative data to perform their assigned duties. data users
are responsible for:
• safeguarding their access privileges
• the use of the administrative data in conformity with all applicable university policies,
• securing such data.
information services (is) -- information technology experts assigned to transactional and reporting
systems that maintain administrative data. is is responsible for:
• overseeing the safe transport and storage of data to and from campus-hosted systems
• establishing and maintaining the underlying campus infrastructure
• performing activities required to keep the data intact and available to users
• working with data supervisors to develop automated processes to identify erroneous,
inconsistent, or missing data
• working with data support groups and data stewards to resolve data issues.
office of institutional effectiveness (ifx) – ifx is responsible for:
• working with data stewards to develop definitions of commonly used data elements and define
how official university metrics are calculated
• promptly reporting data discrepancies and inconsistencies discovered in the course of its work to
the appropriate data supervisor for resolution
• implementing consistent reporting guidelines across campus based on institutional policies and
federal regulations
• providing all external reporting in all data stewardship domains
• assessing and appropriately fulfilling all requests that require data from multiple data
stewardship domains
data management committee (dmc) – a university-wide committee primarily composed of data
stewards and data supervisors. the dmc is co-chaired by the director, institutional effectiveness and
the assistant vice president for systems and networks. data stewards will share best practices during
their meetings, as well as raise concerns that cross functional areas. designated data users may be
invited to attend, as appropriate. the dmc is responsible for:
• reviewing the operational effectiveness of administrative data management policies and
procedures and making recommendations for improvement and change
• providing oversight of all university processes which capture, maintain, and report on
administrative data
• ensuring regular and appropriate collaborative communication with data users on operational
changes that may impact business processes and data.

irm-4007 – administrative data management policy
university of richmond | 6
irm-4007.4 – applicable regulations and accreditation standards
a. sacscoc principles of accreditation 12.5 (student records)
b. health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 (hipaa), public law 104-191
c. payment card industry data security standard (pci dss)
d. family educational rights and privacy act (ferpa) (20 u.s.c. § 1232g; 34 cfr part 99)
e. red flags rule of the fair and accurate credit transaction act of 2003 (fact act), public law
108159, section 114
f. code of virginia, § 18.2-186.6. breach of personal information notification.
g. general data protection regulation (gdpr) (eu) 2016/679
h. gramm- leach-bliley act (glba), also known as the financial services modernization act of 1999,
public law 106–102, 113 stat. 1338
related policies:
irm-2001 – use of technology and information resources
irm-4002 – data exposure policy
irm-4003 – information security policy
irm-4004 – data security policy
irm-4006 – general data privacy regulation privacy notice
irm-4005 external data transfer policy
responding to requests for information about members of the university community
acd-2004 – privacy of education records (ferpa) policy
policy background:
initial policy approved: july 27, 2020
policy was reviewed by it governance steering committee, the school deans, and president's cabinet prior
to approval in 2020.
non-substantive updates made to policy and the list of administrative data stewards updated on august 23,
2021
list of administrative data stewards updated on august 3, 2022
policy reviewed by president's cabinet prior to revision may in 2023.
faculty administrative data added as a domain in september 2023.
list of administrative data stewards updated october 10, 2024 to reflect personnel changes in some offices.

irm-4007 – administrative data management policy
university of richmond | 7
list of administrative data stewards updated november 11, 2024 to reflect personnel changes in some
offices and student employment transition to hr.
policy contacts:
vice president for information services and chief information officer

exhibit 1
university of richmond administrative data stewards
november 11, 2024
data stewardship domains and their respective data trustees and data stewards:
1) finance data
a. data trustee: executive vice president and chief operating officer (dave
hale)
b. data steward(s): senior associate vp & university controller (laurie
melville), assistant controller (steve walker*)
c. data stewardship domains: budget data, accounting data, grants,
investment data (spider mgt), procurement and accounts payable data,
student accounts (bursar) data, payroll and tax data
2) hr & student employment data
a. data trustee: executive vice president and chief operating officer (dave
hale)
b. data steward(s): chief human resources officer (geraldine sullivan),
director hr operations (jillian zemp*), tas, student employment (caitie
hoeckele)
c. data stewardship domains: employment data (staff, faculty, contractors,
temps, students, etc.), benefits/compensation data, position control data, payroll
data, performance data, learning data, employee recruiting data, emergency contact
data for employees, employee (and dependent) photos, w-4's, i9's
3) student admission data
a. data trustee: vice president for enrollment management (stephanie dupaul)
b. data steward(s): director of admission, operations, (lindsey monacell)
c. data stewardship domains: admission prospects/inquiries, high school/college data,
score reports (sat, act, toefl, gre, gmat, lsat), admission applications
and related materials, basic parent data (until point of enrollment), application
decision history, decision notification, spcs
admission, law admission, mba admission
4) student registration data (for both credit and non-credit students)
a. data trustee: vice president for planning & policy (lori schuyler)
b. data steward(s): university registrar (kristen ball*), sr. associate registrar
(bryan moyer), sr. associate registrar (erica jackson)
c. data stewardship domains: student academic history (courses, grades, registration,
curriculum, degree audit, transcripts-electronic, transfer, paper, and microfiche;
grade changes, transfer work); graduation (application, conferral, honors, diploma
information); academic courses (catalog, course set up, schedule); academic
curriculum (major/minors, degrees, programs,
gradtracker); classrooms (location management for academic buildings);
compliance (ferpa training, ncaa eligibility, veteran's administration
certifications); emergency contact data for students; student photos

5) financial aid data
a. data trustee: vice president for enrollment management (stephanie dupaul)
b. data steward(s): avp and director student financial aid (william bryan),
sr. associate director financial aid (kathryn owens*)
c. data stewardship domains: financial aid applications, fafsa applications, css
profiles, tax returns, parent/guardian/student income, parent/guardian/student assets,
family size/status, home equity, expected family contribution (both fm and im),
need-based grant, scholars, scholarships, athletic funding, pell grants, loans
(federal/private/parent), academic progress, title iv, withdrawals, award
notifications, work study
6) advancement/alumni data
a. data trustee: vice president for advancement (martha callaghan)
b. data steward(s): asst. vp advancement systems (kim lebar), director
advancement data & analytics (matt kane),
director, advancement operations (katie bell)
c. data stewardship domains: constituent data (alumni, parents, donors, prospective
donors), gift data, career/outcomes data
7) health & well-being data
a. data trustee: vice president for student development (todd adams)
b. data steward(s): director of operations, health and well-being (kelly
harris)
c. data stewardship domains: student health (pyramed, labcorp), university
recreation (fusion), health promotion (everfi), caps (titanium)
8) center for student involvement data
a. data trustee: vice president for student development (todd adams)
b. data steward(s): director of student involvement (vittoria doyle),
c. data stewardship domains: student involvement (extra-curricular) and events
(presence, eventbrite)
9) student development & housing data
a. data trustee: vice president for student development (todd adams)
b. data steward(s): senior director of housing and residence life (patrick benner*)
c. data stewardship domains: student conduct (maxient), academic progress
(maxient), student housing (starrez, banner)
10) disability services
a. data trustee: vice president for student development (todd adams)
b. data steward(s): director of disability services (cort schneider); disability
services accessibility specialist (julia kelly)
c. data stewardship domains: disability data for students (maxient and clockwork)
11)campus services & facilities data
a. data trustee: executive vice president and chief operating officer (dave
hale)
b. data steward(s): executive director campus business services (jerry
clemmer*)

c. data stewardship domains: dining/catering (micros, hospitality suite),
csgold/onecard, event management, campus bookstore, school dude, hvac
(talon, niagara, thinstack), building data, ricoh.
12)ifx data
a. data trustee: vice president for planning & policy (lori schuyler)
b. data steward(s): executive director, institutional effectiveness (melissa hartz*)
c. data stewardship domains: assessment data (aqua, taskstream ams), course
evaluations (courseeval), survey data (qualtrics), census files (frozen files for
admission, enrollment, faculty, and degree completion stored in box)
d. cross-functional requests: all cross-functional requests (those that require
data from multiple data domains) should be routed to ifx for assessment and
fulfillment.
13)information services data
a. data trustee: vice president and chief information officer (keith mcintosh)
b. data steward(s): asst. vp systems and networks (troy boroughs*), asst
vp telecom, media and user services (mark nichols)
c. data stewardship domains: identity data (netid, urid, network passwords, ur
email addresses, dns names), ur phone numbers, computing assets
14) faculty administrative data
a. data trustee: executive vice president for academic affairs & provost (joan
saab)
b. data steward(s): director, ur better (dustin engels*)
c. data stewardship domains: academic appointment data (tenure status, rank,
academic title, etc.); faculty employment files (appointment letters, transcripts);
faculty performance data (annual reviews, mid-course reviews, tenure & promotion
portfolios and files); faculty portfolio data (publications, service, credentials—
faculty success); faculty governance records (faculty senate minutes,
university/school committee documents)
*members of the university of richmond's data management committee