university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
policy #: acd-7301 policy title: appointment of endowed chairs
effective: 06/10/2022 responsible office: academic affairs
date
approved:
06/10/2022 approval: board of trustees
replaces
policy dated:
04/24/2020 responsible
university official:
executive vice president and provost
purpose:
this policy is designed to ensure that the university honors the intentions of donors and that income from
endowed chair funds and other gifts designated for support of faculty and administrative positions are used
effectively in supporting the university's academic mission.
scope:
this policy applies to all donor restricted funds that have been established at the university of richmond to
support an endowed chair.
index:
acd-7301.1 ......definitions
acd-7301.2 ......appointment of endowed faculty chairs
acd-7301.3 ......appointment of endowed administrative chairs
acd-7301.4 ......selection of endowed chairs
acd-7301.5 ......names of endowed chairs
acd-7301.6 ......applicable regulations and accreditation standards
policy statement:
acd-7301.1 – definitions
endowed faculty chairs
an endowed faculty chair is a teaching and research position awarded to a faculty member for which all or
part of the faculty member's compensation is paid for by the endowment. typically, an appointment to an

acd-7301 – appointment of endowed chairs
university of richmond | 2
endowed faculty chair is made in recognition of the individual's attainment of the highest levels of
teaching, scholarship, research and service in his or her discipline or field. for purposes of this policy,
endowed faculty chairs also include appointments to endowed professorships.
endowed administrative chairs
an endowed administrative chair is an administrative leadership position for which all or part of the
administrator's compensation and/or programmatic activities are paid for by the endowment. endowed
administrative chairs are created to support the recruitment and retention of administrators in key
leadership capacities for the university. an appointment to an endowed administrative chair is made
upon assumption of a leadership position associated with the chair.
acd-7301.2 – appointment of endowed faculty chairs
appointments to endowed faculty chairs should reflect the highest ideals of academic excellence and
scholarly or creative achievement. appointments to endowed chairs must comply with the terms of the
gift documentation, applicable university and regulatory policies, and relevant sections of the faculty
handbook. except in the rare case of visitors appointed to endowed chairs, appointments to faculty
endowed chairs are made by the board of trustees upon recommendation of the provost and president.
terms of appointment
1. in keeping with the purpose of endowed chairs as the highest academic honors an institution can
bestow, endowed faculty chairs should be held only by full professors, unless otherwise specified in
the gift documentation. in the unusual circumstance in which the appointment of an associate
professor is in the best interest of the institution, candidates who hold the rank of associate professor
may be appointed to an endowed chair where the teaching and scholarly achievements warrant.
2. in certain circumstances and only with the written approval of the provost, distinguished visiting
faculty may hold an endowed faculty chair when it is in the university's interest to do so and it is not
inconsistent with the intentions expressed by the donor in the supporting gift documentation. an
appointment to an endowed chair for a visitor is normally for a period of one academic year, but may
be for a shorter period. school and university procedures for appointment of visitors will be followed
in making visitor endowed chair appointments. visiting endowed chair appointments do not require
the approval of the board of trustees.
3. candidates for appointment to an endowed faculty chair will have an outstanding record of teaching,
research, publication, creative activity, scholarly achievement, and service, appropriate to the
discipline and fields of specialization.
4. in cases in which schools wish to launch a search, after reviewing the conditions of the gift agreement
and supporting documentation, the dean will submit a request to the provost to fill the open faculty
chair, identifying a preferred process and requesting to conduct either an external or internal search.
the provost will approve a selection process which specifies the scope of the search. the presumption
is that the selection process will involve a formal search committee, though the dean, with the
approval of the faculty of the department or school that holds the endowed chair, may recommend that
this requirement be waived in a particular case. the selection process employed will comply with
applicable university and school-specific policies.
5. for new appointments or reappointments to endowed chairs made on or after february 1, 2014, the
term as chair may be for the duration of the appointee's service on the faculty, or may be for a fixed
term or renewable terms as proposed by the dean and agreed to by the provost. the presumption is

acd-7301 – appointment of endowed chairs
university of richmond | 3
that endowed chairs will not rotate among department or school members unless an endowed chair has
been established for this purpose by the donor, or the proposed rotation is consistent with the donor's
intent and it is in the interest of the university to do so. in the latter case, the dean will make a
recommendation to and obtain written approval from the provost.
6. conditions of the endowed chair will be set forth in the appointment letter, as will a statement of
circumstances under which expectations may be modified. the appointment letter will also specify
the official title associated with the chair as specified by the donor, the use of which must be
considered a condition of service.
responsibilities of an endowed faculty chair
the holder of an endowed faculty chair is responsible for:
1. fulfilling the conditions of the gift and any specific duties identified at the time of appointment;
2. continuing to demonstrate evidence of excellence in teaching and scholarship, (research, or artistic
production as appropriate), as documented in annual reports submitted by the chair holder;
3. complying with the terms of the use of professional development funds, as specified in university
policy on the use of income from endowed chairs;
4. actively participating in the chair holder's home department and/or school; and
5. complying with the review policy of the chair holder's school.
transition to this policy
individuals holding an endowed faculty chair as of february 1, 2014 will be permitted to fulfill the
remainder of their terms, consistent with the intent of the donor as expressed in the gift agreement and
related documentation. when an endowed chair becomes vacant, the appointment of a new chair holder
will be made in accordance with this policy and the gift documentation.
acd-7301.3 – appointment of endowed administrative chairs
appointments to endowed administrative chairs are made upon assumption of a significant leadership
position within the school or university for which an endowed chair has been designated. appointments
to endowed chairs must comply with the terms of the gift documentation and applicable university and
regulatory policies. once appointed to the administrative position through an appropriate university
process, administrators whose office has an endowed chair are by definition deemed holders of the
administrative endowed chair. separate board approval is not required.
terms of appointment
1. endowed administrative chairs may be held by individuals with faculty status when appropriate, but
the primary criterion for appointment is fitness for the administrative duties of the chair. the status of
previous incumbents does not dictate whether a chair holder should have faculty status; faculty status
is determined by the faculty as outlined in the faculty handbook.

acd-7301 – appointment of endowed chairs
university of richmond | 4
2. interim or visiting administrators shall not hold endowed administrative chairs, unless the chair was
specifically established for this purpose.
3. the appointment to an endowed administrative chair is intended for the position, not the person. an
individual appointed to an endowed administrative chair will ordinarily hold such chair until the
conclusion of his or her term of service in that leadership position. if the chair holder leaves that
position to assume another role in the university, including as a member of the faculty, he or she will
relinquish the administrative chair.
responsibilities of an endowed administrative chair
the holder of an endowed administrative chair is responsible for:
1. fulfilling the conditions of the gift and any specific duties identified at the time of appointment;
2. continuing to demonstrate evidence of excellence in administrative leadership, as documented in
annual reports submitted by the chair holder; and
3. complying with the review policy of the chair holder's division or with the review policy for
members of the president's direct reports, as appropriate.
acd-7301.4 – selection of endowed chairs
while the gift agreement between the donor and the university may establish selection criteria for an
endowed faculty or administrative chair, the agreement should not contain a provision giving the donor
or his or her designee the right to participate in the selection of the endowed chair holder. instead,
consistent with the criteria set forth in the gift agreement, the university should have the discretion to
recommend individuals for appointment to endowed chairs in a manner that best serves the strategic
objectives of the university and, for faculty appointments, adheres to the principles of faculty
governance. appointments to faculty endowed chairs are made by the board of trustees.
unless otherwise stipulated in the gift documentation, an appointment to an endowed faculty or
administrative chair may be made to a current employee of the university or an outside candidate. in the
case of endowed faculty chairs, the determination of internal versus external appointments will be
approved by the provost upon recommendation by the appropriate dean, in accordance with the process
in section acd-7301.2 (appointment of endowed faculty chairs, terms of appointment, item 4) of
this document.
acd-7301.5 – names of endowed chairs
names of endowed chairs are determined at the time of the chair's establishment by the board of trustees
and cannot be modified except by action of the board of trustees.
acd-7301.6 – applicable regulations and accreditation standards
virginia uniform prudent management of institutional funds act (va. code §64.2-1100 et seq.).

acd-7301 – appointment of endowed chairs
university of richmond | 5
related policies:
university policy on the use of income from endowed chairs
policy background:
revisions to align with university naming principles were reviewed by president's cabinet prior to approval
by the board of trustees on 06/10/2022.
policy revision was reviewed by academic deans, president's cabinet, and faculty senate before approval by
the board of trustees on 04/24/2020.
original policy became effective 02/01/2014.
policy contacts:
executive vice president and provost
vice president & secretary to the board of trustees