university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right
to elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
index:
hrm-1001.1………definitions
hrm-1001.2 .....…..policy
policy statement:
hrm -1001.1 – definitions
cobra stands for the consolidated omnibus budget reconciliation act. under certain circumstances,
cobra allows employees to pay premiums for and maintain the group health insurance that they would
otherwise lose after terminating employment with the university.
policy #: hrm-1001
policy title: benefits for 10 & 11-month staff and faculty on
9-month contracts
effective: prior to 2007 responsible office: human resources
date
approved:
prior to 2007 approval: executive vice president and chief operating
officer
replaces
policy dated:
responsible
university official:
chief human resources officer

hrm-1001 - benefits for 10-month staff and faculty on 9-month contracts
university of richmond | 2
hrm 1001.2 – policy
staff
10 & 11-month staff continue to receive benefits during the one or two month(s) they do not work as long as
they return to work from their one or two-month leave.
if a 10 or 11-month staff terminates employment during the one or two months the employee does not work,
benefits will end at the end of the 10 or 11-month period. benefits will retroactively be terminated and the
employee will be responsible for any bills associated with the termination of benefits.
faculty
faculty on 9-month contracts (paid over 10 pay periods) continue to receive benefits during the summer as
long as they are returning for the next academic year.
when a faculty member on a 9-month contract (paid over 10 pay periods) terminates employment and will not
return for the new academic year, benefits terminate at the end of the contract (day after graduation). health,
dental and/or vision insurance continue until the end of the month or may 31.
if a faculty member decides after the end of the 9- or 10-month academic year that they will not be returning
to the university, benefits will retroactively be terminated and the employee will be responsible for any bills
associated with the termination of benefits.
faculty and staff
if an employee has elected to have their pay over a 12-month period, this does not extend the time they may
remain on university benefits.
cobra coverage will be extended to all employees that terminate for any reason besides gross misconduct.
cobra coverage will allow an employee to continue health, dental and/or vision benefits for up to 18
months. the employee is responsible for the full health, dental and/or vision premiums plus a 2% cobra
administration fee.
related policies:
n/a
policy background:
policy existed prior to 2007.
non-substantive changes made on january 11, 2023, february 6, 2023, and december 4, 2023
policy contacts:
chief human resources officer