university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
the university of richmond recognizes the importance of family and the difficulty employees face following
the loss of a loved one. for this reason, the university provides staff with paid time off for planning, settling
family affairs, bereavement, and/or attending the funeral or memorial service of a member of their immediate
family.
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right
to elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
index:
hrm-2004.1 .....eligibility
hrm-2004.2 .....definitions
hrm-2004.3 .....policy statement
hrm-2004.4 .....procedures
policy statement:
hrm-2004.1 – eligibility
all staff who are regularly scheduled to work 1,000 or more hours per year are eligible for bereavement
leave. employees who work less than 1,511 hours per year receive pro-rated leave.
hrm-2004.2 – definitions
domestic partner: two people who live together and share a domestic life, but aren't married or joined by
a civil union.
hrm-2004.3 – policy statement
policy #: hrm-2004 policy title: bereavement leave
effective: 08/14/2023 responsible office: human resources
date
approved:
08/14/2023
approval: executive vice president and chief operating
officer
replaces
policy dated:
prior to 2007 responsible
university official:
chief human resources officer

hrm-2001- bereavement leave policy
university of richmond | 2
when a death occurs in an employee's immediate family, the employee will be allowed necessary time off
according to the following schedule
a maximum of five (5) days off with pay is permitted upon the death of a staff member's:
• spouse or domestic partner
• brother or sister
• children
• parent or guardian
a maximum of three (3) days off with pay is permitted upon the death of a staff member's:
• grandparent
• grandchild
• mother or father in-law
• son or daughter-in-law
• brother or sister in-law
a maximum of one (1) day off with pay is permitted upon the death of a staff member's:
• aunt or uncle
• niece or nephew
• first cousin
*a domestic partner is an unrelated and unmarried person who is in a committed relationship with and shares
common living quarters with an employee.
a staff member may make a request to their immediate supervisor to use accrued vacation time for leave not
covered by this policy, or if the staff member needs additional time off in excess of the time allowances outlined
above due to the death of a family member covered by this policy.
bereavement leave is typically taken immediately following the loss of the family member
hrm-2004.2 – procedures
bereavement leave will not be deducted from the employee's sick leave or vacation leave balances. please
notate bereavement leave when documenting on time card (non-exempt personnel), monthly leave record
(exempt personnel), or on-line through banner web.
related policies:
no related policies
policy background:
policy in existence prior to 2007.
august 2023 revisions reviewed by president's cabinet prior to approval.
policy contacts:
chief human resources officer