university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
this policy is to provide guidance to individuals who are entertaining or incurring meal expenses on behalf of
the university and to ensure the appropriate use of university resources to further the university's mission of
teaching, research, scholarship and service. additionally, this policy is designed to ensure the university's
compliance with federal tax law and third party sponsoring agency regulations, as applicable.
scope:
this policy applies to anyone who incurs meals or entertainment expenses paid by the university of
richmond, regardless of the source of funds. this includes faculty, staff, and students.
federally funded grant awards may have additional requirements and are not addressed in this policy.
principal investigators should review the grant's specific requirements or contact the grants accounting
office for assistance.
index:
4204.1 ...............definitions
4204.2 ...............overview
4204.3 ...............business meals
4204.4 ...............departmental meal expenses
4204.5 ...............food or refreshments for university events
4204.6 ...............tips and gratuities
policy #: fin-4204
policy title: business meals and entertainment
effective: 07/01/2019 responsible office: office of strategic sourcing & payments
date
approved:
06/13/2019 approval: executive vice president and chief operating
officer
replaces
policy dated:
prior to 2009 responsible
university official:
senior associate vice president and university
controller

4204 – business meals and entertainment
university of richmond | 2
4204.7 ...............payment options
4204.8 ...............accountable plan
4204.9 ...............roles and responsibilities
policy statement:
4204.1 – definitions
accountable plan
an accountable plan is a reimbursement arrangement or method for reimbursing employees for business
expenses that complies with irs regulations and the related treasury regulations. the accountable plan
requirements must be satisfied to ensure that employees may be reimbursed on a tax-free basis.
allowable expense
a necessary, reasonable, and appropriate expense incurred for the primary benefit of the university
appropriate
appropriate means an expense is suitable or fitting in the eyes of an objective third party, and fulfills a valid
business purpose.
business purpose
the business purpose establishes that a particular good, service, or activity is necessary to fulfill the mission
of the university and primarily benefits the university, not the individual. in order for an expense to be
reimbursed under the accountable plan, or allowable on a university purchasing card (p-card), a legitimate
business purpose must be provided.
necessary
an expense is necessary when it is required to achieve a particular business objective.
reasonable expense
a reasonable expense is ordinary – not lavish or excessive – and reflects a prudent decision to incur the
expense on behalf of university in furtherance of its business.
receipt
a receipt is a document that substantiates the business transaction and provides proof of payment of an
expense. a receipt will typically include date of transaction, merchant name, list of items purchased or
services received, form of payment (cash, check, credit card), and amount paid. credit card statements are not
sufficient, nor are copies of canceled checks, unless other documentation supporting the amount paid and
what was purchased is also included.

4204 – business meals and entertainment
university of richmond | 3
4204.2 – overview
the primary sources of university revenue are students and their families (e.g., tuition, room, board) and
individuals and philanthropic individuals and organizations that have been inspired to give to the university
in support of our mission (e.g., current use donations, endowment support). members of the university
community have a responsibility to exercise good judgment and prudence when incurring meal and
entertainment expenses on the university's behalf.
the university will pay for reasonable, appropriately documented, and properly authorized meal and
entertainment expenses that are necessary to achieve a legitimate business purpose so long as those expenses
adhere to the guidelines outlined in this policy. in general, the frequency and quality of meals and
entertainment expenses should be governed by what is reasonable and appropriate to the purpose involved.
for the meal or entertainment expense to be allowable, the employee must provide the business purpose for
the expense, along with specific details including the names of the attendees, cost, date, and location of the
meal. for those meals where there are ten (10) or more individuals included in the meal and it is difficult to
determine who attended the event, the name of the department or organization and an estimate of the number
of individuals in attendance may be provided, rather than actual names.
4204.3– business meals
travel meals: meals involving business-related travel are considered allowable expenses. please see fin-
4200 travel policy for more information and guidelines.
meals with visitors and guests: the university allows payment for reasonable and necessary meal expenses
incurred during a meal at which faculty, staff, or students and external parties are present for the purpose of
discussing university business. examples of such meals include meals with job candidates and meals and
receptions while hosting visiting scholars.
employee-only meals: university payment for business meals attended only by ur employees which do not
involve travel is only permitted if documentation supporting the meal clearly establishes the business purpose
of the meal and that the business could not reasonably take place any other time or manner. the frequency of
such meals and the related expense must be reasonable and appropriate to the purpose of the discussion and
the nature of the business conducted.
meals eaten alone while not in travel status do not qualify as a business meal or business expense.
if the meal is established to be a legitimate business expense, the most senior university representative
present at the meal is responsible for the expense and must be the individual who provides p-card payment or
seeks reimbursement.
4204.4– departmental events and functions
student-focused and academic functions: student-oriented receptions that are designed to support student
programming or enhance campus life and community are permissible, as are meals and receptions held in
conjunction with academic programs. the business purpose must be noted, and the frequency and cost of
such events should be appropriate to the situation.

4204 – business meals and entertainment
university of richmond | 4
employee events: university payment for meals or receptions provided to a group of employees, such as an
annual holiday party, reception recognizing the service of a colleague departing after years of service, or meal
associated with a planning retreat, training activities, or completion of a major project, may occasionally be
permissible to serve the purpose of promoting goodwill, employee relations, and morale, or to celebrate
significant accomplishments within a unit or department. such events should not be frequent, and the costs
must be reasonable and appropriate to the situation. meals which may be classified as personal events such as
birthdays, weddings, showers, etc., are not allowable university expenditures.
4204.5– food or refreshments for university events
food or refreshments required for a university on-campus event (breakfast, luncheon, dinner or reception)
should be provided through campus dining services unless campus dining services is not available for the
event. the department should review the food and beverage guide,
http://events.richmond.edu/events/food-
beverage-guide/index.html or contact the events office.
4204.6– tips and gratuities
tips and gratuities are reimbursable for normal services associated with food service. tips included on meal
receipts will be reimbursed. as a rule, employees should not tip more than 20% of the bill. tips should be
reasonable and any unusual amounts should be documented.
4204.7– payment options
there are several options available to employees for payment of business-related meals and entertainment
expenses that comply with this policy. these options may not be available to students; therefore, students
incurring permissible expenses should consult with the sponsoring office before making payment.
university credit cards
university credit cards (p-cards) may be used for meals and entertainment expenses related to a business
purpose. a receipt must be provided. review fin-4301 purchasing card policy for detailed information
about university credit cards.
reimbursement
if an individual has used their own funds for a permissible business meal or entertainment expense, they may
seek reimbursement. all expenses submitted for reimbursement require a receipt and must comply with this
policy. reimbursement requests must be submitted within sixty (60) days of the completion of the event in
order for the payment to be considered non-taxable to the employee.
all employee reimbursements will be issued as direct deposit payments; therefore, employees seeking
reimbursement should ensure they have direct deposit setup in bannerweb before submitting their request.
direct bill
in limited situations, such as group events, the department may request that the vendor or merchant direct bill
the university for meal and/or entertainment expense.
internal departmental transfer
when purchasing meals or incurring expenses using campus-based vendors, the department should request the
expense be charged directly to the department's budget index.

4204 – business meals and entertainment
university of richmond | 5
situations in which meal and entertainment expenses are made on behalf of individual students or
reimbursements are provided to students must conform to fin-2101 policy on provision of payments to
students. although students may receive their reimbursement by check or direct deposit, direct deposit is
strongly encouraged.
4204.8– accountable plan
the university's reimbursement policy is intended to meet the internal revenue service definition of an
"accountable plan." in order to reimburse employees for business related expenses on a tax-free basis, federal
tax rules and the irs audit requirements must be followed. under the accountable plan, the reimbursement of
expenses must meet the following requirements:
• expenses must have a business connection and must be reasonably related to the expenses the
university is expected to incur.
• expenses must be substantiated within sixty (60) days of the completion of the event. receipts must
be provided for the expenses.
failure to satisfy an expense within 60 days of the completion of the event may cause the expense to be
treated as though it were paid under a non-accountable plan and treated as compensation, subject to required
payroll tax withholding.
4204.9– roles and responsibilities
responsibilities of payee
the payee bears the responsibility to:
• ensure all expenses being paid or reimbursed by the university are valid, have a legitimate business
purpose, and conform to university policy and grant or donor restrictions (where relevant);
• attest that expenses submitted for reimbursement have not been previously paid through a prior
submitted expense report, travel advance, an outside agency or other third party, or a university credit
card;
• submit all forms related to the event to the university via the appropriate approver within sixty (60)
days of the completion of the event;
• retain accountability for ensuring all expenses are in accordance with this policy document and
sponsoring agency, if applicable, even though the employee may delegate responsibility for the
preparation of the reimbursement request to another employee.
the electronic submission of the expenses for payment or reimbursement affirms that these responsibilities
have been met.
responsibilities of the approver
individuals authorized to approve business expenditures of others will administer these policies and have the
responsibility to:
• review the expenses;
• attest that the purpose of the expense is valid and directly related to university business;

4204 – business meals and entertainment
university of richmond | 6
• ensure that information contained on the request is properly documented and supported by attached
receipts;
• affirm the expenses were necessary, reasonable, and consistent with university policies and the stated
business purpose;
• request further documentation or explanation for expenses that appear to be excessive or unusual in
relation to the nature of the meal or event. explanation of such expenditures must be included with the
reimbursement request or p-card report;
• submit the approval through chrome river on a timely basis;
• understand that while accounts payable will review the request, the primary responsibility for the
appropriateness of expenditures rests with the department representative incurring the expense and the
individual responsible for departmental approval.
the electronic submission of the approval for payment or reimbursement affirms that these responsibilities
have been met.
responsibilities of supervisors and employees making arrangements on behalf of others
supervisors are responsible for ensuring that faculty, staff, students, and university guests who may be
incurring expenses on behalf of their unit are aware of and adhere to this policy. employees who make
arrangements on behalf of others are responsible for adhering to this policy and making others involved in the
event aware of these and other applicable policies.
responsibilities of accounts payable (controller's office)
the accounts payable office is generally responsible for reviewing requests prior to processing to verify that
expenses are reasonable. they are responsible for:
• ensuring information on the reimbursement request is supported by accompanying documentation
and/or receipts, and is both complete and in accordance with this policy;
• reviewing expenses for compliance with university policies;
• ensuring the requests have received the appropriate approval(s) and are mathematically accurate;
• ensuring additional information or clarification is provided for any unusual requests;
• processing the properly documented and approved requests expeditiously.
if the request does not meet one of the criteria listed above, accounts payable may contact the individual
seeking payment or approver, return the request for corrections, deny payment, and/or request repayment to
the university for expenses for which the university was charged directly.
responsibilities of principal investigators
in addition to responsibilities described in this policy, grant principal investigators (pis) who are incurring or
approving expenses associated with an externally funded grant must adhere to the expenditure requirements
defined in fin-1203, grant expenditures. pis are also responsible for being aware of and complying with
any grant-specific requirements related to business meals and entertainment expenses specified as part of the
grant award that differ from the university's institutional policies. please contact the grants accounting
office for assistance.

4204 – business meals and entertainment
university of richmond | 7
related policies:
fin-4101 policy on use of university funds and financial responsibilities
fin-1203, grant expenditures
fin-4200 travel policy
fin-4301 purchasing card
fin-2101 policy on provision of financial resources to students
policy background:
policy was reviewed by academic deans and president's cabinet prior to approval on 06/13/2019.
this policy replaces a policy that was previously approved prior to 2009.
policy contacts:
accounts payable manager, accounts payable office
director of strategic sourcing & payments, office of strategic sourcing & payments
senior associate vice president and university controller