university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
the implementation of a minimum order policy by university catering is designed to maximize resources,
curate diverse and high-quality menus, and deliver the best possible service for all university events.
scope:
this policy applies to anyone who requests university of richmond catering services, both internal customers
as well as external customers.
index:
fin-19001.1 ......definitions
fin-19001.2 ......policy
fin-19001.3 ......roles and responsibilities
policy statement:
fin-19001.1 – definitions
internal customers: departments within the university of richmond, including student organizations,
which utilize catering services and pay using university resources. (direct transfer of funds from a university
account to the catering account.)
policy #: fin-19001
policy title: food and beverage catering minimums
effective: 07/01/2024 responsible office: university dining services
date
approved:
05/20/2024 approval: executive vice president and chief operating
officer
replaces
policy dated:
n/a responsible
university official:
executive director of dining services

fin-19001 – food & beverage catering minimums policy
university of richmond | 2
external customers: individuals, companies, or organizations that are not university departments, student
organizations, or athletic programs within the university of richmond and utilize university catering
services. external customers are responsible for all city and state taxes as well as catering fees. these
invoices are paid in cash, check, or credit card.
approved vendor: food & beverage vendors pre-approved by campus business services.
fin-19001.2 – policy
a. catering minimums
both internal and external customers that wish to utilize university catering services must place a minimum
order of $150 for food and beverages. in addition, a 20-person minimum is required for the following
catering menus:
o continental breakfast, buffet breakfast & served breakfast
o buffet lunch, cold plated lunch
o buffet & seated dinner
o receptions
there is no minimum required for ordering boxed lunches.
if these minimums are not met, customers can use the pick-up menu and pick up their order from the
heilman dining center. alternatively, clients may utilize a vendor from the approved vendor list in
addition to completing the food waiver form.
exceptions to this policy must be approved by the executive director of university dining services.
b. use of outside vendors
internal and external customers hosting an event in a university space may only use catering services from
university catering or an approved vendor.
a food waiver form must be completed and approved before hosting an event at the university of richmond
using an off-campus vendor for catering services.
an off-premise vendor can only work in the jepson alumni center or bottomley house if a the university
of richmond catering department declines the event. the event must also have been submitted for approval
in the event management system (ems); complete and receive approval using the food waiver form; and
only utilize a vendor from the approved vendor list.
approved vendors are prohibited from using any university kitchens, kitchenettes, spaces controlled by the
university catering department, or any retail location kitchens. use of any catering or retail equipment is
not allowed without expressed written consent by the director of catering or the executive director of
dining. this includes access to all service ware, coffee makers, coolers and other kitchen equipment, mobile
kitchen trash receptacles, water, and/or ice. these spaces include, but are not limited to, the following spaces:

fin-19001 – food & beverage catering minimums policy
university of richmond | 3
o jepson alumni center & bottomley house catering kitchen and back catering hallway
o gottwald center catering kitchenette
o richmond room/hdc catering pantry
o tyler haynes catering kitchen/tyler's grill kitchen
o international commons/passports kitchen
o humanities commons kitchenette
o robins center catering kitchens on terrace level
o robins stadium club level kitchen and skybox (3rd floor) kitchen
o modlin center catering kitchen
o well-being center/flavur kitchen
o boatwright library/8:15 at boatwright café kitchen
o queally welcome center catering kitchen
o weinstein hall brown alley catering kitchen
o westhampton center living room kitchenette
fin-19001.3 –roles and responsibilities
director of university catering responsible for communicating and enforcing the policy to
dining and catering staff as needed.
office & catering specialist
event managers
catering support coordinators
responsible for communicating the policy to internal and
external customers.
executive director of dining services
responsible for approving exceptions to the policy.
policy contacts:
director of university catering
assistant director of university catering
dining services office & catering specialist