university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
this establishes the university policy on the procurement and purchase of work-related cellular phones and
devices and the service and carrier costs for such devices.
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right
to elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
index:
fin-4103.1 ........policy statement
policy statement:
fin-4103.1 – policy
except in limited circumstances noted below, the university of richmond (ur) does not provide university
cell phones nor reimburse employees for cell/mobile phones, equipment or mobile plan service costs, even in
cases where employees may use personal devices in the course of their work. employees are not required to
own cell/mobile phones as a condition of employment but must ensure they can meet job expectations, which
may include being accessible for on-call situations.
university funds (including restricted funds and professional development funds) may not be used to purchase
mobile phones nor reimburse or carry service contracts used by employees, except as noted below.
policy #: fin-4103
policy title: employee cellular/mobile phone and device
policy
effective: 04/01/2024 responsible office: controller's office
date
approved:
03/01/2024 approval: executive vice president and chief operating
officer
replaces
policy dated:
n/a responsible
university official:
senior associate vice president & controller

fin-4103 – cellular/mobile phone and device policy
university of richmond | 2
the university will continue to make a limited number of cell phones, cellular enabled devices such as ipads,
and mobile hotspots available to departments for shared use during on-call rotations or on a check-out basis.
these devices may be used only for university business needs and are not intended for personal use.
university employees whose primary job responsibilities require extensive travel on behalf of the university
or whose primary job responsibilities include serving as the first point of contact for emergencies may be
eligible to receive a cell phone allowance. (employees whose responsibilities include serving in on-call
rotations for emergencies are not eligible for a cell phone allowance, but may utilize the department's shared
on-call phone(s) during their assigned rotation). the university will review the allowance amount regularly
and reserves the right to adjust at its discretion.
in rare circumstances, ur will reimburse employees for special add-on mobile phone / data usage costs that
are required for work responsibilities, for example charges for international service for international travel
required by ur. exceptions may only be made with written approval of the appropriate vice president and
the evp/coo.
cell phone allowances
employees who are eligible to receive a cell phone allowance are responsible for selecting and contracting
with a carrier and paying for the plan they desire. employees are also responsible for choosing and purchasing
their own device and, if desired, any additional equipment and/or insurance. there is no additional allowance
for device purchases or upgrades. any replacement for loss or damage will be at the expense of the employee.
payment of bills for the service plan and device are the sole responsibility of the employee, not the university.
any employee receiving an allowance must provide their department with the device phone number and
maintain active cell phone service in order to continue receiving payment. employees are not required to
itemize their professional versus personal use of the phone or turn in monthly documentation, but they should
retain proof of purchase and monthly service plan records to document eligibility for participation in the
program.
the purpose of this allowance is to help defray the business cost associated with owning and maintaining a
device and plan for employees whose primary job responsibilities require extensive travel on behalf of the
university. it is not intended to cover 100% of the costs. any costs not covered by the monthly allowance are
the employee's responsibility. employees may not use university resources (including restricted or
professional development funds) to pay for cell phone service, equipment, or accessories.
if an employee becomes ineligible for the cell phone allowance (due to a change in jobs, change in job duties,
separation from the university, etc.), any fees associated with the device, remaining service contract charges,
or service contract change or cancellation fees are the responsibility of the employee.
if there are problems with service or the device, the employee will need to work directly with their service
provider for resolution. the university cannot accept any liability for claims, charges, or disputes between the
employee and the service provider.

fin-4103 – cellular/mobile phone and device policy
university of richmond | 3
provision for ipads and other cellular-enabled devices
to the extent that an ipad or other internet-enabled device is required for a university business purpose, such
a device may be purchased using university funds through the existing is procurement process. such devices
remain university property. university supported cellular plans associated with such devices assigned to
individuals will be discontinued june 30, 2024. the university will maintain some internet-enabled
equipment with associated plans for use by departments for necessary business purposes.
security requirements
all university employees are responsible for protecting university information no matter where it is stored or
accessed. employees must ensure they are in compliance with all applicable university data security and
software requirements and policies.
related policies:
fin 4101-use of university funds and financial responsibilities
policy background:
policy was reviewed by president's cabinet and school deans prior to approval.
policy contacts:
senior associate vice president and university controller