university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
the purpose of this policy is to support the most effective use of the university's classroom spaces, ensure
that classes are assigned to the space that is most appropriate for their pedagogical needs, and ensure that
classroom scheduling enables students to select and build a course schedule that supports their path to
graduation.
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right
to elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
index:
prm-1004.1 ......policy
appendix a……time-slots
policy statement:
prm-1004.1 – policy
the university registrar is responsible for the assignment of classroom space to each class at the university.
the highest priority for classroom space is for offering classes at the university. classrooms may be reserved
policy #: prm-1004
policy title: classroom scheduling policy
effective: 04/15/2024 responsible office: registrar's office
date
approved:
04/08/2024 approval: executive vice president and provost
replaces
policy dated:
2009
responsible
university official:
university registrar

prm-1004 – classroom scheduling policy
university of richmond | 2
for other academic and non-academic purposes, with the registrar's permission, but no reservations for
classroom use will be accepted until after the drop/add period has ended and the appropriateness of all
classroom assignments for the term have been confirmed.
all classes taught at the university must be scheduled in standard class time slots (see appendix for approved
time slots) to ensure the availability of appropriate space and ensure students can enroll in all of the courses
that they need for their academic program. all classes, regardless of length, must begin at the official start
time. in rare cases and due to pedagogical needs, exceptions may be made to allow a class time to extend
beyond the standard end time.
law school classes follow a separate time block schedule from the rest of the university; classroom
assignments within the law school space are typically made by the law school in collaboration with the
registrar.
no more than ten percent of all department or school classes may be offered in any one time slot.
departments and schools may schedule no more than fifty percent of classes during slots 2-4. various
monday-wednesday classes must equal the number of wednesday-friday plus monday-friday classes.
classes that meet once per week and start prior to period 6 must be paired according to one of the two-day per
week patterns. departments may schedule up to two pairs of once-per-week classes that cross into timeslots 2
and 3.
faculty will be assigned a classroom appropriate to their pedagogical needs, which may not be a classroom
nearest their office.
related policies:
space allocation and facilities resources policy
office assignment policy
university facilities access policy
lock and key management policy
policy background:
this policy has been in existence and published on the university registrar's website since 2009.
in 2024, the existing policy was codified and updated. president's cabinet and deans reviewed the policy
prior to approval on 04/08/2024.
policy contacts:
university registrar
dean of the law school

university of richmond | 3
appendix a – time slots