university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
the university assigns responsibility for completing or approving business transactions and activities to
employees based on their roles at the university. the purpose of this policy is to define the circumstances
under which university employees may delegate their administrative approval authorities or processing
responsibilities to other employees.
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right
to elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
this policy does not apply to delegations of contract signature authority. contract approval and signature
authority is determined by the board of trustees (see fin-4409, delegation of contract approval and
signature authority).
this policy does not apply to the delegation of academic responsibilities as outlined in academic policies or
the academic catalog.
index:
fin-12001.1 ......definitions
fin-12001.2 ......policy
policy statement:
fin-12001.1 – definitions
policy #: fin-12001
policy title: delegation of approval authority and
processing responsibilities
effective: 01/01/2024 responsible office: office of university controller
date
approved:
12/11/2024 approval: executive vice president and chief operating
officer
replaces
policy dated:
n/a responsible
university official:
senior associate vice president and university
controller

fin-12001 – delegation of approval authority and processing responsibilities
university of richmond | 2
approval
an approval is the act of reviewing and responding to an item, transaction, or group of items or transactions
that is performed by an appropriate university employee, affirming that the item may proceed for further
action or processing, recommending changes, or denying it.
approver
an approver is an employee who, as part of their role, has responsibility to review and authorize business
transactions.
delegation
delegation is the assignment of an individual's authority for completing or approving business transactions to
another university employee.
delegate
a delegate is the person to whom authority for completing or approving business transactions is assigned by
the person with primary authority for those transactions.
fin-12001.2 – policy
approval responsibilities
the approval process plays a critical role in ensuring that the activities undertaken by the university are in
alignment with the university's mission of teaching, research, scholarship and service; represent an
appropriate use of the university's charitable resources; and conform with institutional policies and
procedures. only authorized university employees (i.e., "approvers") have the authority to obligate the
university to receive or spend funds, provide or receive services, or otherwise commit institutional resources.
university employees with approval authority are expected to exercise good judgement in evaluating the
reasonableness of transactions in light of university policies and procedures, and sound business practices.
delegation of approval responsibilities
approvers may temporarily delegate the authority to perform administrative approval responsibilities on their
behalf to a delegate, as described in this policy. the delegate selected by the approver must have the requisite
knowledge and skill set to be able to evaluate the proposed transactions or activities effectively. additionally,
the proposed delegation must not place the delegate in a position of approving their own transactions or those
initiated by their approver (see "segregation of duties" discussion, below). the approver is responsible for
actions taken by their delegate; delegation does not shift responsibility or accountability for the task from the
approver. delegations should be infrequent and for short periods of time, generally no longer than two weeks.
delegations that are more frequent or for longer periods of time must be discussed with and approved by the
university controller for financial transactions or the relevant vice president for other types of transactions.
if an employee has plans to be away from the university for five or more days, approval responsibilities
should be delegated to ensure that university business transactions are not delayed as a result of an absence.
a delegate has the same responsibilities as the approver and is acting in the approver's name. delegation may
be made only to someone who has knowledge of the transactions and relevant university policies, regulations,
and restrictions associated with the transactions. typically, delegations will be made to the approver's

fin-12001 – delegation of approval authority and processing responsibilities
university of richmond | 3
supervisor or someone who has similar responsibilities for another area/unit. a delegate may not further
delegate approval authority that has been delegated to them.
examples of appropriate delegations include the following:
• employees with transactional supervisory responsibilities, such as time approval, leave approvals and
travel expense approvals, may delegate those responsibilities to their supervisor or the cost center
manager in their area.
• employees with responsibility for managing budgets and approving financial transactions may
delegate those approval responsibilities to another cost center manager.
• employees with responsibility for approval of payments to students may delegate those
responsibilities to the avp financial aid or the director of financial aid
• employees with responsibility for system access approvals may delegate those approval
responsibilities in accordance with the policies associated with that system, typically to another system
administrator.
• employees with responsibility for approval of building access may delegate those approval
responsibilities only in accordance with relevant building access policies, typically to the building
steward's vice president.
approvers with different types of approval responsibilities should assign each type of responsibility to the
most appropriate delegate, even if that results in having multiple delegates during an absence.
for transactions related to grants, a principal investigator may only delegate approval to someone with first-
hand knowledge of the research/project that the grant is funding (e.g. a lab manager or post-doc working on
the same project).
approval or official acknowledgement that is required from a university employee or officer by a federal
agency or third party (e.g., submission of a compliance certification) may not be delegated, except as
permitted by the party requesting certification.
if delegation of specific approval or transaction authority is restricted by another policy, the more restrictive
delegation policy must be followed.
segregation of duties for financial transactions
segregation of duties is fundamental to the university's system of internal control over financial transactions,
providing "checks and balances" to assist in detecting errors, deterring fraud, and preventing the concealment
of irregularities. when evaluating a potential delegate for financial transactions, it is important for the
approver to understand the delegate's responsibilities in their typical role so that the duties they will
temporarily assume on the approver's behalf will not conflict with the permissions/authorizations in their
usual position.
to the extent that complete segregation of duties is not realistic due to the size of or expertise within a
department or unit, best efforts should be made to develop and maintain other preventative or detective
controls. units should consult with the office of internal audit or the controller's office to discuss any
unusual circumstances.

fin-12001 – delegation of approval authority and processing responsibilities
university of richmond | 4
delegation of transactions that do not involve approval
responsibilities for transactions that do not involve approvals should also be delegated if the employee has
plans to be away from the university for five or more days to ensure that university business transactions are
not delayed as a result of an absence.
delegation of responsibilities for transactions that do not include approvals may only be made to someone
who has knowledge of the transactions and all relevant policies, regulations, and restrictions associated with
the transactions. typically, delegation will be made to someone who has those same responsibilities for
another area:
• employees with responsibility for completing and submitting specialized hr transactions may
delegate those responsibilities to an individual who has those same responsibilities for another area.
• employees with responsibility for completing and submitting financial transactions may delegate
those responsibilities to an individual who has the same responsibilities for another area (typically to
another procurement specialist).
related policies:
fin-4403 procurement policy
fin-4408 contract management policy
fin-4409 delegation of contract approval and signature authority
fin-4301 purchasing card policy
fin-2101 policy on provision of financial resources to students
fin-4204 policy on business meals and entertainment
fin-16001 policy on reporting and investigating suspected financial fraud, waste, and abuse
fin-1100 policy on gifts, prizes, and awards
gov-1005 policy on monetary support and cash donations
prm-1002 policy on space allocation and facilities resources
policy background:
this policy was reviewed by academic deans and president's cabinet prior to approval on 12/11/2024.
policy contacts:
senior associate vice president and controller
vice-president & general counsel
chief human resources officer