university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
policy #: sec-2002 policy title: designation of personnel for emergencies
effective:
10/01/2021
responsible office:
office of emergency management
date
approved:
09/29/2021 approval: president
replaces
policy dated:
9/17/2021
responsible
university official:
director of emergency management
purpose:
the university of richmond makes safety for our university community a top priority. when interruptions in
normal university operations occur as a result of an emergency, the university will exercise efficient use of its
resources to ensure the safety and welfare of the university community, continuity of key operations, and the
protection of university property. to accomplish this, university of richmond has identified three distinct
categories of designated personnel who may be needed to perform duties on campus during an interruption in
normal operations: emergency personnel, essential personnel, and continuity personnel.
scope:
this policy applies to personnel designated as emergency, essential, or continuity. faculty, staff, and
contracted employees not designated in these categories are expected to listen to and comply with requests
from designated personnel and should not report to campus during emergencies unless authorized or notified.
failure to comply with this policy may result in appropriate disciplinary action.
index:
sec-2002.1 .......definitions
sec-2002.2 .......procedures
sec-2002.3 .......applicable regulations & accreditation standards

sec-2001- designation of personnel for emergencies
university of richmond | 2
policy statement:
sec-2002.1 – definitions
continuity personnel
personnel identified by their department's director, dean, or chair who are recorded in their department's,
division's, or unit's continuity of operations (coop) plan as being required to perform critical functions
during activation of the coop plan.
disaster
any natural, technological, or civil emergency that causes damage of sufficient severity and magnitude to
result in a declaration of a state of emergency by the university of richmond, the city of richmond, henrico
county, the governor of virginia or the president of the united states.
emergency
any occurrence or threat, whether natural or man-made, which results or may result in substantial injury or
harm to the population or substantial damage to or loss of property or natural resources.
emergency personnel
personnel who may be required to respond to an emergency and whose job duties affect safety or operation of
the university, to include members of the incident management team or executive group. additionally, this
includes individuals required to work in the emergency operations center or community assistance center.
emergency personnel have access to campus when normal campus operations are modified or suspended.
essential personnel
employees who are identified by the relevant president's cabinet member or academic deans, due to the
nature of the services they provide, are expected to report to work when the normal schedule is suspended.
supervisors of employees providing essential services should clearly communicate the work attendance
requirements during an emergency, regardless of media announcements of university closings, cancellations
or delays.
non-essential personnel
employees who are not expected to report to work during a closing, cancellation, or delayed opening.
ur alert
a multimedia communication system that provides timely and accurate information about emergency
situations that could affect the university and which is activated for life safety situations.
sec-2002.2 – procedures
identification
• emergency personnel will be identified by the relevant president's cabinet member or academic dean in
conjunction with the director of emergency management. the designation will be indicated on the
emergency personnel designation and notification form.
• essential personnel will be identified by the relevant president's cabinet member or academic deans.
the designation will be indicated on the employee's position description.

sec-2001- designation of personnel for emergencies
university of richmond | 3
• continuity personnel will be identified by the dean or director of the department. the designation will be
indicated within the department's continuity of operations plan.
emergency personnel
emergency personnel designations will be identified by the relevant president's cabinet member or
academic dean in conjunction with the director of emergency management. the designation will be
indicated on the emergency personnel designation and notification form. the form will be distributed by
october 1 of each year for signature by the employee, the employee's supervisor, and the dean or division
leader. the signed form will be submitted by the employee by november 15 of each year.
training
all emergency personnel, essential personnel, and continuity personnel must complete the required training
courses identified in the multi-year training and exercise plan. certificates of completion must be submitted
to the office of emergency management via e-mail to bschaal@richmond.edu
. training courses are only
required to be completed once.
notification to report
during a disaster or emergency, the office of emergency management will use ur alert to notify emergency
personnel who are required to staff either the emergency operations center and/or the community assistance
center. notifications may be sent out via text message, e-mail, and/or may be posted to alert.richmond.edu
.
once notified, emergency personnel must determine which employee(s) will staff the first operational shift.
emergency personnel must be available by the time indicated.
compensation
compensation for performing work during emergency or disaster situations is based on employee type and
policies maintained by human resources. consequences for failing to or refusing to report to work when
required will be handled on a case-by-case basis by the employee's supervisor and may result in disciplinary
action.
sec-2002.3 – applicable regulations & accreditation standards
emergency management accreditation program (emap) standard 3.2: coordination
emergency management accreditation program (emap) standard 4.7: communication and warning
emergency management accreditation program (emap) standard 4.9: training
emergency management accreditation program (emap) standard 4.10: exercises, evaluations, and
corrective actions
r
elated policies:
sec-2003 - emergency management policy
inclement weather and emergencies policy
time reporting and pay practices during inclement weather
policy background:

sec-2001- designation of personnel for emergencies
university of richmond | 4
the emergency management program advisory committee reviewed this policy prior to approval in 2015.
the emergency management program advisory committee reviewed and updated this policy prior to its
approval in september 2021. the policy will be reviewed annually by the office of emergency management.
non-substantive changes were made on september 29, 2021.
policy contacts:
director of emergency management
avp of public safety & chief of police