university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
the university of richmond (the "university") has established this early retirement plan ("the plan") as an
opportunity for certain eligible staff employees and faculty with a continuing appointment (as described in
the university of richmond faculty handbook) to elect to relinquish their positions in exchange for certain
benefits from the university. for purposes of this plan, eligible staff employees and faculty with a
continuing appointment shall be referred to as "employee(s)." the benefit consists of two parts: 1) certain
perquisites associated with active employment status as described under "employment prerequisites"; and 2)
medical benefits as described in "medical benefits". no benefits are available under the plan except as
specifically provided by the terms of the plan.
s
cope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the
right to elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
index:
hrm-1008.1 .....definitions
hrm-1008.2 .....eligibility
hrm-1008.3 .....elections
hrm-1008.4 .....medical benefits
hrm-1008.5 .....employment prerequisites
policy #: hrm-1008
policy title: early retirement plan for staff and faculty with
a continuing appointment
effective: 11/18/2024 responsible office: human resources
date
approved:
11/18/2024 approval: board of trustees
replaces
policy dated:
pre-2005 responsible
university official:
chief human resources officer

hrm-1008 – early retirement plan for staff and faculty with a continuing
appointment
university of richmond | 2
hrm-1008.6 .....pay for annual leave balances
hrm-1008.7 .....conditions to benefits
hrm-1008.8 .....death of the employee
hrm-1008.9 .....administration
hrm-1008.10 ...claims procedure
hrm-1008.11 ...amendment and termination
hrm-1008.12 ...successors
policy statement:
hrm-1008.1 – definitions
a) "effective date" means the date that the eligible employee's early retirement commences.
an employee's effective date shall be specified in such employee's election form that has
been signed by the employee and approved by human resources. in general, the effective
date for staff will be sixty (60) or more calendar days from the date that their election form is
approved by human resources. in general, the effective date for faculty with a continuing
appointment will be one (1) semester from the date that their election form is approved by
human resources. the university's director, benefits & employee well-being has
discretion to determine an employee's effective date and such determination is binding and
final.
(b) "years of employment" are the number of years in which the employee has been actively
employed as a part-time employee or full-time employee by the university. time spent
working for the university as a casual/temporary employee or a faculty member with a
temporary and restricted appointment (as defined in the faculty handbook) will not count
toward the calculation of years of employment. for purposes of computing an employee's
years of employment, a period during which the employee is absent on an approved paid
leave of absence, or a faculty member with a continuing appointment is on an approved
sabbatical will be included when calculating years of employment. a period during which the
employee is absent on an approved unpaid leave of absence is not considered service with
the university for purposes of calculating years of employment. while part-time work may
count toward the total number of years of employment, to be eligible for the early retirement
plan, the employee must be a full-time employee during the ten consecutive years
immediately preceding their effective date. the university shall have discretion in
determining an employee's years of employment and its determinations and interpretations
shall be final and binding.
notwithstanding any provisions of this plan to the contrary, service with respect to qualified
military service will be administered in accordance with the uniformed services employment and
reemployment rights act of 1994 and the special rules relating to veterans' reemployment rights
under internal revenue code section 414(u). accordingly, an approved unpaid leave of
absence for qualified military service will be deemed service with the university for purposes of

hrm-1008 – early retirement plan for staff and faculty with a continuing
appointment
university of richmond | 3
calculating years of employment.
(c) a "staff employee" is a full- or part-time employee (i.e., not temporary or casual) whose
primary job responsibilities are in the areas of administrative/management support,
librarians, clerical support, service/maintenance support and dining service operations. the
university shall have discretion in determining if an employee qualifies as a staff employee
and its determination shall be final and binding.
(d) a "faculty member with a continuing appointment" is a faculty member whose primary
responsibilities include teaching, research, or management of academic programs and who
have been appointed to a continuing appointment without fixed term or a continuing
appointment with fixed term, as defined by the university's faculty handbook. in the
event of a conflict between the definition set forth in this policy and the university faculty
handbook, the terms of the faculty handbook shall govern. faculty appointed to other
faculty categories specified in the faculty handbook, including but not limited to tenured,
tenure-track/probationary, and temporary and restricted term appointments, are not eligible
under this plan. the university shall have discretion in determining if an individual qualifies
as a faculty member with a continuing appointment and its determination shall be final and
binding.
(e) a "full-time staff employee" is an employee who is scheduled to work between 38.75 and
40 hours per week for a period of no less than nine months per year, or 30 hours per week for
the full 12 months.
(f) a "part-time staff employee" is an employee who is regularly scheduled to work less than
1,511 hours per year.
(g) a "temporary/casual staff employee" is an employee who works on an "as needed" basis for a
specific project or a limited duration of time.
(h) a "full-time faculty member with a continuing appointment" is a faculty member with a
continuing appointment who is considered to be full-time under applicable university policies.
(i) a "part-time faculty member with a continuing appointment" is a faculty member with a
continuing appointment who is considered to be part-time under applicable university policies.
(j) the employee's "age" is defined as his/her age rounded down to the nearest whole year.
partial years do not count.
(k) "paid work" is work for which the employee receives compensation from the university and
includes, but is not limited to, time actually worked, vacation time, sick leave, holidays, and
bereavement leave. the university shall have discretion to determine what constitutes paid work
and its determination shall be final and binding.
(l) "approved paid leave of absence" is leave time for which the employee is paid by the
university and includes, but is not limited to, short term disability, parental leave, . the
university shall have discretion as to what constitutes an approved paid leave of absence, and
its determination shall be final and binding.
(m) "approved unpaid leave of absence" is a period during which the employee is excused
from work by the university and for which the employee receives no compensation. the

hrm-1008 – early retirement plan for staff and faculty with a continuing
appointment
university of richmond | 4
university shall have discretion to determine what constitutes an approved unpaid leave
of absence and its determination shall be final and binding.
(n) a "break in service" occurs when an employee's employment by the university is
terminated for any reason.
hrm-1008.2 – eligibility
to be eligible to elect to retire early under the plan, an employee must: (a) be a full-time employee of
the university between the ages of 60 and 65 on their effective date; (b) the employee's combined
age and years of employment must equal or exceed a total of 80 by their effective date; and (c) must
have worked as a full-time employee for the 10 consecutive years immediately preceding their
effective date. should an employee incur a break in service and return to university employment,
they may qualify for the plan if the employee meets the criteria set forth above, including the
requirement to have worked as a full-time employee for the 10 consecutive years immediately
preceding their effective date.
notwithstanding the forgoing, an approved unpaid leave of absence for qualified military service will
be deemed service with the university for purposes of eligibility and included in the 10 years of
consecutive and continuous full-time employment requirement.
notwithstanding the forgoing, if an employee takes one or more approved unpaid leaves of absence
for qualified family and medical leave during the 10 consecutive years immediately preceding their
effective date, such leave will not be considered a break in consecutive and continuous full-time paid
employment.
hrm-1008.3 – elections
an employee who wishes to retire early under the plan must elect to relinquish their position and work
responsibilities in exchange for benefits under the plan. unless otherwise provided, all elections shall
become irrevocable seven (7) days after they are made. an election shall be made by submitting a
written election to human resources using the online election form found on the website, which
includes a general release. an eligible staff employee must provide 60 days' notice and an eligible
faculty with a continuing appointment must provide one (1) semester's notice to relinquish their
position, unless shorter notice is acceptable to the university and approved by the director, benefits &
employee-well-being. the notice periods described above will commence when the election form is
received by human resources.
hrm-1008.4 - medical benefits
an employee who elects and is approved to retire early under the plan will receive the university
medical benefits on the same basis as if they had continued as an active employee. the medical
benefits will be administered in accordance with applicable medical benefits plan documents. the
employee who elects to retire early under the plan will be billed monthly for the medical benefits.
payment will be due upon receipt of the bill. failure to pay the amount of the bill will result in the

hrm-1008 – early retirement plan for staff and faculty with a continuing
appointment
university of richmond | 5
immediate cancellation of the early retiree's medical benefits. the university retains the right to
change the frequency of the billing.
the medical benefits offered under this section of the plan are an alternative to continuation coverage
available to the employee under the university's medical benefits plan in accordance with the
consolidated omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1985("cobra"). an employee may elect to
participate in the plan and also elect cobra continuation coverage under the university's medical
benefits plan. an election to receive medical benefits under this section of the plan, however, is
deemed a waiver of the employee's right to elect cobra continuation coverage under the university's
medical benefits plan.
when an employee who has elected to retire early under the plan reaches age 65 they will cease
participation in the medical benefits plan for active employees. if the staff employee was employed
before july 1, 1992, or a faculty with a continuing appointment was continuously employed in a full-
time permanent position prior to august 31, 2003, they will receive post-retirement medical benefits
under the university of richmond medical benefits plan currently in effect for retired employees. if the
staff employee was not employed before july 1, 1992 or the faculty with a continuing appointment
was not continuously employed in a full-time permanent position prior to august 31, 2003, the retired
employee will not be eligible for such post-retirement medical benefits.
the university retains the right to modify, amend or terminate the terms and conditions of the medical
benefits and the university's medical benefit plans at any time (including, without limitation, after an
employee's retirement).
hrm-1008.5. – employment prerequisites
an employee who elects and is approved to retire early under the plan may receive certain perquisites
associated with active employment status. such perquisites are listed on the human resources web
page at: https://hr.richmond.edu/retirees/index.html. the university retains sole discretion in
determining the perquisites made available under this section and to modify the perquisites from time
to time. use of any of these perquisites by the employee is subject to the rules and regulations which
govern the administration of the perquisite.
hrm-1008.6 - pay for annual leave balances
a staff employee who elects and is approved to retire early pursuant to the plan will be paid for their
eligible vacation balance if permitted under then current university policies.
hrm-1008.7 - conditions to benefits
in order to receive benefits under the plan, an employee must continue to perform substantial
services for the university, consistent with their position and until their last regularly scheduled
workday preceding their effective date. if the employee terminates employment with the university
for any reason or the university terminates the employee's employment for cause before their last
regularly scheduled day of work preceding their effective date, or if the employee otherwise fails to
continue to satisfactorily perform the requirements of their position, the employee shall forfeit all

hrm-1008 – early retirement plan for staff and faculty with a continuing
appointment
university of richmond | 6
benefits under the plan. the university shall have discretion to determine whether the foregoing
conditions to benefits have been met and its determination shall be final and binding.
hrm-1008.8 – death of the employee
if an employee dies on or before the last regularly scheduled day of work preceding their effective
date, no benefits will be provided under the plan.
hrm-1008.9 – administration
the university shall have the responsibility for administering the plan and carrying out its terms. the
university's board of trustees (the "board of trustees") will appoint one or more persons to be
responsible for the administration of the plan, and all references in the plan to the "university," as they
relate to administrative matters, shall be deemed to include the plan administrator and the appeals
committee described in claims procedure section below. unless the board of trustees determines
otherwise, the university's director, benefits and employee well-being will be the designated plan
administrator.
the university will have complete discretion to interpret and administer the plan and to make all
decisions with respect to interpretation and administration of the plan and calculation and
determination of benefits and eligibility. the decisions of the university shall be final and binding on
all persons. the university shall be entitled to rely conclusively on and shall be fully protected in any
action taken or suffered by the university in good faith in reliance on, any actuary, counsel, accountant
or other persons elected by the university, or in reliance on any tables, data, information, valuations,
calculations, certificates, opinions or reports that shall be furnished to the university.
hrm-1008.10 – claims procedure
the following claims procedure will be used to review any claims regarding eligibility for benefits
made under the plan. an employee may file a written claim of eligibility for benefits with the
designated plan administrator. if the claim is denied, the plan administrator will furnish the claimant,
within 90 days after receipt of the claim, a written notice of denial of the claim containing information
required by applicable law. the claimant may request in writing a review of the claim by an appeals
committee appointed by the chief human resources officer within 90 days after the claimant receives
notice of the denial of his or her claim. the appeals committee shall afford the claimant a full and fair
review of the decision denying the claim. the appeals committee shall permit the claimant to review
any documents that are pertinent to the claim, submit issues and comments in writing, and meet with
the appeals committee as part of the review procedure. the appeals committee's decision on review
shall be made in writing, shall be issued within 60 days following receipt of the request for review and
shall be final.
all claims for benefits under the university's medical benefits plan shall be administered in
accordance with the claim's procedure of that plan.

hrm-1008 – early retirement plan for staff and faculty with a continuing
appointment
university of richmond | 7
hrm-1008.11 – amendment and termination
the board of trustees may amend or terminate the plan at any time.
hrm-1008.12 – successors
this plan is binding on the university and its successors and assigns and on the employee and their
personal representatives and distributees.
policy background:
the original policy was in place prior to 2005.
the current policy was approved and is effective on november 18, 2024
policy contacts:
director, benefits & employee well-being
chief human resources officer