university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
this policy is designed to ensure card access to various doors on campus are dependent upon need and
appropriately maintained within the cbord campus card system.
scope:
this policy applies to all university of richmond faculty, staff, students, vendors and contractors. access is
based on the requirements that an individual department or building sets. while the university utilizes a
centralized mechanism for the provisioning and de-provisioning of access, each department within the
university still maintains access authority over their designated areas. requests for access to certain areas on
campus will need to be approved.
index:
sec-2005.1 .......definitions
sec-2005.2 .......policy statement
sec-2005.3 .......roles & responsibilities
policy statement:
sec-2005.1 – definitions
electronic card access
one card services administers the university of richmond's centralized electronic door access program.
the same system that manages card based financial transactions also manages electronic door access.
each individual is assigned access rights according to their needs. all access rights and privileges are
maintained within the campus card system and not contained on the university of richmond identification
card itself. the ur id card serves as a simple and efficient means of identifying individuals to the
policy #: sec-2005 policy title: electronic card access policy
effective: 10/01/2019 responsible office: one card services
date
approved:
09/29/2019
approval: executive vice president and chief operating
officer
replaces
policy dated:
n/a responsible
university official:
director of business services

sec-2005 – electronic card access policy
university of richmond | 2
campus card system. once an individual presents their "credential" to the reader, a request is
electronically communicated from the reader to the networked card system.
an individual's access rights and privileges can fluctuate over time based on their status within the
university and/or access schedules set in place by departments/buildings.
sec-2005.2 – policy
student access privileges:
resident students are automatically assigned 24/7 access to their residence hall and visitation to other
halls (except atlantic and pacific houses) from 8 a.m. – 2 a.m. monday – sunday (except on home
football game saturdays). visitation to atlantic and pacific houses is 8 a.m. – 2 a.m. monday – thursday
and restricted access from friday through the weekend.
residents of university forest apartments and gateway village also have visitation privileges to the
residence halls. students living off campus do not have access to the residence halls, but access may be
granted on an as needed basis with the approval of the richmond college or westhampton college
deans' offices.
student access to the residence halls is based on the housing contract dates. all access privileges are
removed and the student's campus card account is inactivated when one card services receives a change
of status due to withdrawal, transfer, or suspension. residence hall access and visitation privileges are
removed when students move off campus. access privileges may be revoked due to misconduct.
students may be granted access to certain buildings and labs based on their status within the
department/building (i.e. majors and research students, students in the arts needing access to practice
rooms and art spaces, etc.).
faculty and staff access privileges:
administrative buildings are generally unlocked during business and/or classroom hours. after-hours,
during break periods, or home football game saturdays when buildings are locked, individuals must be
authorized for card access to enter the building.
requests for card access must come from someone other than the person needing access with approval
status. each department/building on campus has a designee for card access authorizations. in most cases,
it is the department's administrative assistant who gets their authority from their director.
access will be terminated once the privileges are no longer needed or the individual is no longer affiliated
with the university or transferred within the university. the human resources office will collect the id
card of the terminated employee and deliver it to the one card office. the one card office will then
mark it in cbord as collected and shred the card.
elevated access privileges:
there are positions within certain departments, such as urpd and facilities, which require specialized
access such as master key and unlock/lock privileges. master key without privacy override allows
access to residence halls and individual rooms, except when the privacy button is engaged on the room
door. master key with privacy override allows the user to enter residence halls rooms in an emergency,
even if the privacy button is engaged.

sec-2005 – electronic card access policy
university of richmond | 3
university employees may access rooms/apartments in accordance with university policies and
procedures, which may be amended at the sole discretion of the university.
university employees may enter the room for reasons deemed necessary, including but not limited to,
emergencies, maintenance, inspections, repairs, inventory, reclaiming university property, health and fire
safety inspections, rearranging furniture to accommodate new roommates, removal of abandoned
belongings, or resolving unsafe or unsanitary conditions.
sec-2005.3 –roles and responsibilities
responsibilities of the student
students should carry their university of richmond identification card at all times for card access purposes.
the university of richmond identification card should be in good working order. if the card is damaged
or lost, the student should come to the one card services office during business hours for a replacement.
any cost associated with replacement cards are the responsibility of the student. lost cards can be
deactivated and reactivated, if found, online in onecardweb.richmond.edu.
students requiring after -hours access to a particular building or lab should contact the department's
administrative assistant to request access.
for everyone's safety, students should not allow any unknown persons into locked buildings on campus.
responsibilities of the department
for additions or changes to faculty, staff or student access, and individual must complete and submit the
online card access request form.
note: dual authentication by approvers such as the president, vice presidents, deans, directors,
department heads, and supervisors as well as the department's/building's access designee are required
for card access.
on an annual basis, one card services will require each department to conduct an audit of access
approvals. upon return of the audit sheet from the departments, one card services will update card access
privileges in the campus card system.
responsibilities of employee
the university of richmond employee should notify their department head if they require after-hours
access to their building.
the employee should carry their university of richmond identification card at all times to ensure they can
get into the building when locked.
the university of richmond identification card should be in good working order. if the card is damaged
or lost, the employee should come to the one card services office during business hours for a free
replacement. lost cards can be deactivated and reactivated, if found, online in onecardweb.richmond.edu.

sec-2005 – electronic card access policy
university of richmond | 4
related policies:
sec-2004 lock and key management policy
policy background:
this policy was reviewed by president's cabinet prior to approval on 9/29/2019
policy contacts:
director of business services, campus services
manager, one-card services