university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
this policy provides guidelines for the use of electronic signatures (as defined herein) at the university of
richmond (the "university"), including defining the circumstances under which electronic signatures may be
used and accepted in conducting university business.
scope:
this policy applies to university faculty, staff, business partners, affiliates, and associates acting in their
authorized capacities in connection with official university activities. it applies to all uses or potential uses of
electronic signatures for the creation, approval, and execution of contracts (as defined herein).
this policy does not require the use of electronic signatures or prohibit the ability to engage in contracts or
other transactions on paper.
this policy does not apply: (a) to university systems with existing built-in electronic approval workflows,
such as workday, ellucian banner, chrome river, esm and onbase; (b) when a handwritten signature on
paper is required by law; (c) to facsimile signatures used on checks issued by the university; or (d) to internal
agreements (as defined herein) or other documents or records that are solely internal to the university.
index:
fin-4412.1 ........definitions
fin-4412.2 ........use of electronic signatures
fin-4412.3 ........approved electronic signature methods and products
policy #: fin-4412
policy title: electronic signature policy
effective: 05/21/2024 responsible office: office of general counsel
date
approved:
05/20/2024 approval: executive vice president and chief operating
officer vice president and general counsel
replaces
policy dated:
n/a responsible
university officials:
vice president and general counsel
director of procurement

fin-4412 – electronic signature policy
university of richmond | 2
fin-4412.4..…… acceptance of third-party electronic signatures
fin-4412.5 ...........violations
policy statement:
fin-4412.1 – definitions
assurance — the degree of confidence in the identity of the individual providing an e-signature.
authentication — the process of securely verifying the identity of an individual providing an electronic
signature.
authorization — verifying that an authenticated user has permission to access specific electronic university
services and/or perform certain operations on behalf of the university.
contract — a contract is a binding commitment by or on behalf of the university that is in oral or written
form, regardless of the title of the operative document or documents. for purposes of this policy, the term
"contract" includes but is not limited to contracts, agreements, leases, memoranda of understanding ("mou"),
gift agreements, mutual aid agreements, settlement agreements, resolution agreements, letter agreements, and
binding letters of intent. this policy applies to contracts in hardcopy or electronic form.
internal agreement — for purposes of this policy, internal agreements are written or electronic documents
that describe a formal understanding between two or more university units, departments, schools, or divisions
regarding operational matters, such as use of space, allocation of funds, service level commitments, or similar
internal matters. internal agreements may take several forms but they are typically documented in the form of
mou's.
electronic record or e-record — a record, including a contract, that is created, generated, sent,
communicated, received, or stored by electronic means.
electronic signature or e-signature — an electronic sound, symbol or process, attached to or logically
associated with an electronic record and executed or adopted by a person with the intent to sign such record.
electronic transaction or e-transaction — an action or set of actions that is conducted or performed, in
whole or in part, by electronic means or via electronic records.
electronic signature method — the method by which the identity of the applicable signatory and his/her
intent to use an electronic signature has been verified.
fin-4412.2 – use of electronic signatures
subject to this policy and other applicable university policies, and applicable law, a contract or other
electronic record may be executed via an electronic signature obtained using an approved electronic
signature method, as described in section fin-4412.3 of this policy. an electronic signature must be
attributable or traceable to a person who has the intent and authority to sign the contract or electronic record,
with the use of adequate security and authentication measures contained in the method of capturing the
electronic signature.
only those university employees who are authorized to sign contracts on behalf of the university under the
university's delegation of contract approval and signature authority policy may execute a contract on

fin-4412 – electronic signature policy
university of richmond | 3
behalf of the university using an electronic signature. this requirement applies to click-through contracts for
software or software as a service.
fin-4412.3 ........approved electronic signature methods and products
electronic signatures must be obtained by using an electronic signature method that meets the following
requirements: for an e-signature method to meet the requirements of this policy, the proposed e-signature
method must:
a. use commercially reasonable and current electronic security protocols;
b. appropriately verify the identifies of the signatories;
c. maintain the information in a retrievable format for the time period prescribed in the
university's record retention policy; and
d. be auditable.
except as provided in this policy, university employees or others signing a contract or electronic record on
behalf of the university shall only use an electronic signature product (e.g., box sign) that has been
approved by the university and for which the university has a current enterprise contract. if required to use
the electronic signature product of a third-party vendor that has not been approved by the university, the
university employee authorized to sign the vendor contract must consult with the university's director of
information security or their designee prior to using such electronic signature product.
fin-4412.4..…… acceptance of third-party electronic signatures
in general, when the university enters into a contract or is a signatory to an electronic record involving a
third party, the university and third party should consent to the use and acceptance of electronic signatures.
preferably, the contract or electronic record will contain language that the respective signatories certify that
they are authorized to sign documents on behalf of their organization and consent to the use of electronic
signatures. in situations where obtaining such consent is impossible or impracticable, consent may be
implied by the context or the parties' conduct or course of dealing.
fin-4412.5 ...........violations
individuals who falsify electronic signatures may be subject to disciplinary action under applicable
university policies and handbooks and criminal prosecution under applicable federal and state laws.
individuals are required to report any suspected or fraudulent activities related to e-signatures immediately in
accordance with the university's reporting and investigating suspected financial fraud, waste, and abuse
policy.
related policies:
fin-4408 contract management policy
fin-4409 delegation of contract approval and signature authority policy
fin-16001 reporting and investigating suspected financial fraud, waste, and abuse
record retention policy

fin-4412 – electronic signature policy
university of richmond | 4
policy background:
reviewed by president's cabinet and approved on may 20, 2024
policy contacts:
director, procurement, procurement office
vice president and general counsel