university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
the purpose of this policy is to outline the roles and responsibilities for establishing and maintaining the
university's emergency management program.
scope:
this policy addresses the university-wide emergency management program and applies to the entire
university community, specifically those with responsibilities identified in the university crisis and
emergency management plan, recovery plan, and other university related emergency management plans and
procedures. the office of emergency management shall perform emergency management functions within
the territorial limits of the university including those properties operated but not owned by the university.
index:
sec-2003.1 .......program organization
sec-2003.2 .......roles and responsibilities of the director
sec-2003.3 .......emergency management plans
sec-2003.4……continuity plans
sec-2003.5……building emergency plans
sec-2003.6……state of emergency
sec-2003.7……applicable regulations & accreditation standards
policy #: sec-2003
policy title: emergency management policy
effective: 06/01/2018 responsible office: emergency management
date
approved:
05/22/2018 approval: president
replaces
policy dated:
n/a responsible
university official:
director of emergency management

sec-2003 – emergency management policy
university of richmond | 2
policy statement:
sec-2003.1 – program organization
the university of richmond established the office of emergency management to administer the emergency
management program. the office of emergency management is the central coordinating office for activities
and programs relating to emergency and disaster preparedness, response, recovery, and mitigation among
departments and officials of the university and with similar departments and officials of other universities,
state, and federal agencies; and with other private and quasi-official organizations.
the emergency management program organization shall consist of the following:
a) an office of emergency management led by a director. the director is empowered to execute the
emergency management program. other assistants and employees that are deemed necessary for the
proper functioning of the office shall be appointed by the director to implement the responsibilities under
this policy.
b) the executive policy group (epg) is the senior level response team that sets policy for the campus' crisis
response and recovery efforts. the epg includes the president, who serves as the university's key public
official.
c) the incident management team (imt) is authorized to staff the emergency operations center (eoc) and
to exercise operational decision-making authority during an emergency. the imt has the authority to
assign university resources, make operational decisions and coordinate with external emergency agencies
to provide the most efficient response and recovery possible.
d) the emergency management program advisory committee (empac) is comprised of program
stakeholders who provide for coordinated input in the preparation, implementation, evaluation, and
revision of the program. the committee is convened by the director at least twice a year, once per
semester.
sec-2003.2 – roles and responsibilities of the director
the director shall be responsible for the organization, administration and operation of the office of
emergency management. the director shall coordinate the activities, services, and programs for emergency
management and crisis response within the university, and shall maintain liaison with the city, county, state,
and federal authorities to ensure the most effective operation and implementation of emergency management
plans.
the director's duties shall include, but not be limited to the following:
a) manage a university-wide comprehensive emergency management program, including but not limited to,
elements addressing preparedness and mitigation/prevention activities, responses to crisis and
emergencies, and recovery operations.
b) coordinate the activity of all other public and private agencies engaged in any emergency management
activities within the university.
c) educate university community members as to actions necessary and required for the protection of their
persons and property in case of disaster, either impending or present, through public information
programs.

sec-2003 – emergency management policy
university of richmond | 3
d) conduct and manage exercises to ensure the efficient operation of the emergency management program
and to familiarize partner agencies with emergency management regulations, procedures, and operations.
e) monitor and advise the executive policy group of threats, emergencies, or disasters that pose a risk to the
lives and safety of students, faculty, staff, and visitors, proposing solutions for their decision on how best
to protect people and property from imminent danger, or from further damage.
f) activate and manage the university emergency operations center (eoc) as the central coordinating
entity during major emergencies or disasters.
sec-2003.3 – emergency management plans
a university-wide, all-hazard, crisis and emergency management plan (cemp) shall be adopted and
maintained by declaration of the president. in the preparation of this plan, the services, equipment, facilities,
and personnel of all existing departments shall be used to the fullest extent possible. when the plan is
approved, each department is charged with performing those functions assigned to it by the plan and will
maintain a current state of readiness at all times. the cemp shall have the full effect of governance whenever
an emergency or disaster occurs on campus.
supporting plans shall be maintained by the office of emergency management to ensure coordinated
activities during all phases of emergency management: preparedness, response, recovery, and
mitigation/prevention. in the preparation of these plans, the services, equipment, facilities, and personnel of
all existing departments shall be used to the fullest extent. when the plans are published, each department
listed within the plan shall perform those functions assigned to it by the respective plan. each department
shall formulate procedures to implement the plan for the department and train staff to perform the
departmental functions within the plan.
all emergency management plans shall be developed and revised through a formal planning process involving
plan stakeholders.
sec-2003.4 – continuity plans
each business unit that is determined by the university to provide essential functions shall maintain a
continuity plan that reflects sufficient forethought and detail to ensure a high probability of successful
maintenance or restoration of essential functions following a disruptive event.
continuity of operations plans shall be submitted to the office of emergency management annually for
approval in an emergency management-approved format and shall address at a minimum the following areas:
a) assignment of personnel as the continuity coordinator for the department.
b) direction and control, including authorities and responsibilities of key personnel, the succession of key
departmental leadership, and delegations of authority.
c) identification of critical departmental functions and staffing capabilities required to continue providing
critical functions.
d) activation, mobilization, relocation, alert, notification, and implementation plans for activating the
continuity of operations plan.

sec-2003 – emergency management policy
university of richmond | 4
e) alternate facility operations.
f) communications (primary and back-up) systems that will be used to keep employees, on-duty and off-
duty, informed of departmental response activities, to coordinate employees in order to carry out
departmental functions, and to keep in contact with customers and suppliers.
g) protection of facilities, equipment, supplies, and vital records.
h) recovery and restoration of services, including employee support, critical asset repair/replacement, and
the continuity of operations.
i) administration and logistics.
sec-2003.5 – building emergency plans
each academic or administrative building on campus shall complete and update annually a building
emergency plan (bep). to accomplish this task:
a) each building shall designate a primary and secondary point of contact for emergency coordination. any
changes to emergency coordination points of contact should be reported to the office of emergency
management as soon as possible.
b) beps shall adhere to the format provided by the office of emergency management.
c) plans shall be updated annually and provided to the office of emergency management.
d) beps should be shared with building occupants, to the fullest extent possible.
sec-2003.6 – state of emergency
in responding to major emergencies and disasters, the president may declare a campus state of emergency to
allow for activation of the university's emergency plans that protect public health, provide safety, preserve
property, and continue critical functions for the university campus community. when a state of emergency
has been declared:
a) the president may use all available campus resources to respond to the disaster and temporarily suspend
rules where compliance to the rules would hinder or delay actions necessary to save lives, stabilize the
incident, and conserve property and the environment.
b) only students, members of the administration, faculty, staff, and emergency personnel are authorized to be
on campus. those who cannot provide proper identification proving their legitimate business on campus
will be directed to leave.
c) the proclamation shall be in writing. the president shall take reasonable steps to give notice of the terms
of the proclamation to those affected by it and shall post a copy of it on the university website and in
public places throughout campus.
if the president is unavailable to declare a state of emergency, the responsibility will automatically be
delegated to the president's designee as outlined in the continuity of administration plan.

sec-2003 – emergency management policy
university of richmond | 5
imposing restrictions
the president, by proclamation, may impose restrictions to provide for the protection of life, property, and the
environment. the president may impose as many restrictions as reasonably necessary to maintain an
acceptable level of public order and services and to protect lives, safety, and property. the president should
detail in writing his or her reasons for imposing restrictions in the proclamation.
the following restrictions may be imposed through the declaration of campus state of emergency:
a) evacuation. the president may direct and compel the voluntary or mandatory evacuation of all or part of
the population of the campus; to prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destination in connection
with evacuation; and to control ingress and egress of a disaster area, the movement of persons within the
area, and the occupancy of premises therein. details of the evacuation may be included or amended in a
subsequent proclamation.
b) restricted access. in the best interest of the university community's safety, access to campus may be
limited to residential students and essential personnel.
c) curfew. the proclamation may impose a curfew prohibiting in certain areas and during certain periods the
appearance in public of anyone who is not performing protective actions sanctioned by the university.
d) restricting activities. the following activities or conditions may be restricted: 1) movement of people in
public places; 2) the operations of offices on campus; and 3) other activities or conditions the control of
which may be reasonably necessary to maintain order and protect lives and property during the state of
emergency within the area designated in the proclamation.
termination of state of emergency
the president will by proclamation terminate the entire declaration of emergency or remove any of the
restrictions when the emergency no longer requires them.
sec-2003.7 – applicable regulations & accreditation standards
emergency management accreditation program (emap) standard 3.2: coordination
related policies:
sec-2002 – designation of personnel for emergencies
policy background:
the emergency management program advisory committee and the president's cabinet reviewed this policy
prior to approval on 05/22/2018. the policy will be reviewed annually by the office of emergency
management.
original policy date: 5/22/2018
policy contacts:
director of emergency management
avp for public safety & chief of police