university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
the purpose of this policy is to provide guidance to university employees and students about when to seek
licensing for events involving copyrighted media.
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right
to elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
index:
stu-4002.1 .......policy
stu-4002.2 .......applicable regulations & accreditation standards
policy statement:
stu-4002.1 – policy
according to the federal copyright act, copyrighted materials, like movies, can only be used for a public
performance if they are properly licensed. under copyright law, a copyright owner has the exclusive right to
publicly display his/her work. therefore, university students and employees and any non-university entities
sponsoring an event in university space must have the proper copyright authorization in order to publicly
exhibit a film or video. if a student or employee is unsure whether a license is necessary, they must seek
advice from the center for student involvement or the university library.
policy #: stu-4002
policy title: film and media screening policy
effective: 02/15/2025 responsible office: center for student involvement
date
approved:
02/08/2025 approval: vice president for student development
replaces
policy dated:
pre-2020 responsible
university official:
director of student involvement

stu-4002 – film and media screen policy
university of richmond | 2
the following matrix can assist members of the university community in determining when copyright
authorization is required:
yes no
the screening is open to the campus
community, general public, or a club or
organization
you are viewing the film in your residence hall room
or apartment with friends
the screening is in a space where access is not
restricted (e.g. residence hall lounges, meeting
rooms, event spaces)
the film is being shown as part of a class to officially
registered students in a classroom, where content of the
film directly relates to the course
the screening is publicly advertised on a flyer,
social media, etc. people attending are outside
the circle of friends and acquaintances, such as
showing a film to a club or organization, or
showing a film for class but inviting others not
registered for the class to attend
the film is in the public domain or you have the direct
authorization of the content creator
r
egistered student organizations (rsos) should begin planning events that screen films or other media early,
as it can take time to secure necessary licenses.
stu-4002.2 applicable regulations & accreditation standards
copyright law of the united states (title 17)
chapter 11: subject matter and scope of copyright
related policies:
prm-1005 university events and space reservations policy
policy background:
longstanding policy reviewed by president's cabinet in 2025 before inclusion in the university policy
library.
policy contacts:
director of center for student involvement
film and humanities librarian