university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
policy #: hrm-1002 policy title: flexible work arrangement policy
effective:
05/26//2021
responsible office:
human resources
date
approved:
05/25/2021 approval: executive vice president and chief operating
officer
replaces
policy dated:
01/01/2014
responsible
university official:
chief human resources officer
purpose:
the purpose of this policy is to describe the types of flexible work arrangements that may be available to
university staff members, the process for evaluating a request for a flexible work arrangement and the
approval process for such a request.
scope:
this policy applies to flexible work arrangements for certain exempt and non-exempt staff that are expected
to remain in place for 4 to 12 months. these arrangements should be reviewed annually. it is not intended to
apply to short-term, ad hoc arrangements to meet unexpected needs. supervisors are free to use their best
discretion, consistent with applicable law and university policies, to address such short-term or unexpected
needs.
index:
hrm-1002.1 .....definitions
hrm-1002.2 .....policy statement
hrm-1002.3 .....applicable employment law
policy statement:

hrm-1002 – flexible work arrangement policy
university of richmond | 2
hrm-1002.1 – definitions
core hours refers to the period of hours each work day or during which a department must be staffed at an
appropriate or specified level. core hours may also include the requirement for employees to be present
during a particular day of the week.
peak periods refers to cyclical times of the year when business activity or work volume is high, during
which a department must be staffed on site at a specified level. during peak periods, employees may be
required to work on campus.
the department head is responsible for determining the core hours and peak periods for their department
ensuring that the university commitment to a high level of service is maintained.
flexible work arrangement
the term "flexible work arrangement" as used in this policy refers to "flextime" and "flexplace," as
defined below.
flextime
flextime allows for flexible scheduling arrangements that permit variations in starting and departure times,
but does not alter the total number of hours worked in a workweek.
examples of flextime arrangements include the following:
• pre-approved fixed starting and departure times that are different from normal business hours of the
department. starting and departure times continue for a specified period with the same number of hours
worked each day.
• pre-approved starting and departure times that may vary daily. with such a personalized work schedule,
an employee may arrive at work and leave at a different time each day, provided the number of hours
worked each day remains the same.
• variations in the length of the workday (e.g., a seven-hour day followed by a ten-hour day). this type of
schedule may result in a "compressed workweek" where the total number of standard weekly hours is
completed in fewer than five workdays.
all flextime arrangements must support the operational needs of the department and university and
must conform to the overtime, record keeping, and meal break provisions of the fair labor standards
act.
flexplace
the term flexplace refers to arrangements made to allow an employee to work at home or at an off-site
location, for a specified number of hours per week, and/or for a pre- determined duration.
hrm-1002.2 – policy
the university of richmond must be appropriately staffed at all times in order to effectively pursue our
educational mission. in recognition of the wide range of professional responsibilities and duties required of
university staff members, there will be circumstances in which a flexible work arrangement can be

hrm-1002 – flexible work arrangement policy
university of richmond | 3
implemented so as to optimally balance the needs of the university with those of an individual staff member
and work team. this policy outlines the types of flexible work arrangements that are be available and the
process by which such an arrangement is developed and implemented.
all flexible work arrangements must provide the same or enhanced level of service to students and support
of the educational mission as standard, in person work arrangements. space allocation will be aligned with
flexible work arrangements; office-sharing and other kinds of arrangements will be implemented to
maximize the use of space among staff who are working remotely.
flexible work arrangements are not part of the university employee benefits package. new funds will not
be added to accommodate a flexible work option, whether through additional hours or through the purchase
of equipment by the university.
procedures for establishing a flexible work arrangement
requests for flexible work arrangements
• any employee seeking a flexible work arrangement must make a written request to their
supervisor using the flexible work arrangement approval form.
• the written request will include:
o the type of flexible work arrangement being requested;
o the reasons for the request;
o the employee's plan for meeting the responsibilities of their position;
o work schedule (hours, days, commitment) requested; and
o the proposed start date of the flexible work arrangement;
o all flexible work arrangements should be reviewed annually.
considerations for evaluating flexible work arrangements
• every proposal for a flexible work arrangement will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. that
evaluation will include a discussion between the supervisor and the employee seeking the flexible
work arrangement regarding the reasons for the request and the needs of the department in which the
employee works. the evaluation will consider the following factors:
o operational needs of the department and the university along with the impact of the request
on students, faculty, parents, and staff;
o ability for a department to maintain appropriate in-person staffing levels during core
hours and peak periods;
o impact on other staff members both within the department and those who may work regularly with
the department; and
o past performance levels of the employee.
• in addition to the factors outlined above, the following factors will be considered with respect to a
proposed flexplace arrangement:
o whether the position has clearly defined work that can be accomplished off-site;
o if there are position requirements that cannot be met from an off-site location;
o whether the employee's results/productivity can be measured effectively through offsite
supervision;
o whether the department can continue to meet its standards for service and staff availability;
o whether the employee proposing the flexplace arrangement has a demonstrated record of
excellent time-management skills and independent work performance;
o whether there are effective methods for communicating between the employee and supervisor;

hrm-1002 – flexible work arrangement policy
university of richmond | 4
o the frequency and schedule for the employee being on campus to meet with the
supervisor, co- workers, and customer and;
o expectations for availability during the work day. flexplace arrangements will typically include an
expectation of availability of the employee during regular business hours as if the employee were on
campus (e.g., availability through office phone and for ad hoc needs)
approval of flexible work arrangements
• upon receipt of a flexible work arrangement proposal, the supervisor will discuss the request with the
employee. while each department and division is structured differently, the supervisor must discuss the
request with the relevant department or division leader prior to implementation.
• the appropriate vice president or dean must approve any flexible work arrangement inthe respective
division, in consultation with the employee's supervisor and/or department head.
• if approved, the employee will receive a copy of the flexible work arrangement approval form
specifying the terms and conditions for the flexible work arrangement.
• if a request for a flexible work arrangement is not approved, the supervisor will inform the employee of
the reasons for such decision.
modifying or terminating flexible work arrangements
• once approved, the employee may not modify the flexible work arrangement without the written
consent of their supervisor.
• a supervisor may modify an approved flexible work arrangement if they determine that such
modification will better meet the current needs of the department and/or the university. any
modification will be specified in writing and provide sufficient time for the employee to adjust.
• a supervisor, after consulting with the department head, may terminate a flexible work arrangement
if the supervisor determines that the arrangement is no longer consistent with the department's
obligations or if the performance of the employee is not meeting performance expectations.
• if a flexible work arrangement is terminated, the supervisors shall make every effort to provide the
employee with at least 30 days prior written notice.
• if the flexible work arrangement is terminated for poor performance the arrangement may be terminated
immediately.
hrm-1002.3 –benefits and applicable employment laws
an employee working under a flexible work arrangement will, for the most part, be entitled to the same
university benefits as a similarly situated university employees working on campus. leave time must be
submitted based on the hours that the employee is scheduled to work on the day(s) they are sick or taking
vacation.
all flexible work arrangements are subject to applicable employment laws, including the fair labor
standards act, virginia state employment law, and the virginia workers' compensation act.
the university of richmond has insurance coverage to protect its property. this insurance will not cover any
personal property that is used at home, and will only cover university equipment brought to a defined
flexplace work site if it has been listed with the office of safety and risk management or information
services.

hrm-1002 – flexible work arrangement policy
university of richmond | 5
policy background:
original policy was reviewed by president's cabinet before it was approved and became effective on january
1, 2014.
revised policy was reviewed by president's cabinet and academic deans before it was approved on
5/25/2021.
non-substantive revisions made to correct language and form location on january 11, 2023
p
olicy contacts:
chief human resources officer