university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right
to elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
index:
fin-3102.1 ........policy statement
fin-3102.2……primary positions
fin-3102.3……secondary positions and additional compensation
policy statement:
fin-3102.1 – policy
all paid positions at the university must be funded to cover both the salary and associated fringe benefits.
the university utilizes blended fringe benefit rates for use in budgeting, external grant proposals, and similar
activities in order to allocate benefit costs to salaries as the salaries are paid. the university currently
maintains two primary fringe rate categories: a full-time rate and a part-time rate. benefit costs are
recouped by applying the applicable rate to each position, excluding student positions. the current fringe
benefit rates can be found at https://grants.richmond.edu/_common/pdfs/fringe-idc-rates.pdf
.
policy #: fin-3102
policy title: fringe rate policy
effective: 07/01/2021 responsible office: office of the university controller
date approved: 06/14/2021 approval: evp and chief operating officer
replaces policy
dated:
n/a responsible
university official:
senior associate vice-president, finance &
controller

fin-3102 – fringe rate policy
university of richmond | 2
fringe benefit rates associated with an employee's effort charged to a federally sponsored project are
separately developed to incorporate the requirements of federal uniform guidance and specific sponsor
policies. these rates are periodically reviewed and approved by the federal government. actual fringe
benefit rates charged to a sponsored project will reflect the current approved rates for that fiscal year. see
the policy on fringe benefit rates for sponsored projects for information on fringe rates for these funding
sources.
fin-3102.1 – primary positions
the full cost of full-time primary positions must include the full-time fringe rate.
the full cost of part-time primary positions must include part-time fringe rate.
student employment positions do not include a fringe rate and must follow rules associated with student
employment, including limits on hours.
summer research positions for students (even though they may work full-time) do not include a required
fringe rate.
fin-3102.1 – secondary positions and additional compensation
employees who have a secondary position that includes additions to base pay, including full-time
administrative appointments with an appointment letter (such as associate dean, associate provost) and staff
with interim pay must include fringe allocation on the secondary position at the full-time fringe benefit rate.
all other additional compensation for employees, including bonus, overload and summer teaching,
mentoring stipends, award payments, etc. should include fringe allocation at the part-time rate
.
related policies:
fringe benefit rates for sponsored projects
policy background:
policy reviewed by president's cabinet and academic deans prior to approval on 06/14/2021;
2021 policy codified existing practice.
non-substantive revisions made to update titles and hyperlinks on 08/26/2025.
policy contacts:
senior associate vice-president, finance & controller
director, payroll & accounts payable