university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
the purpose of this policy is to provide guidance to individuals who wish to provide gifts, prizes, or awards
utilizing funds administered by the university of richmond. as a non-profit institution, the university of
richmond must exercise good stewardship of its charitable assets and must ensure that those assets are being
used to further the university's educational mission. the policy ensures the appropriate and compliant use of
university resources to further the university's mission of teaching, research, scholarship and service.
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right
to elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
index:
fin-1100.1 ........definitions
fin-1100.2 ........policy
fin-1100.3 ........taxation
policy statement:
fin-1100.1 – definitions
gift
a gift is a cash or non-cash item given as a gesture of goodwill or appreciation. the gift may be, but is not
necessarily, related to job performance or student performance in academic or other realms.
policy #: fin-1100
policy title: gifts, prizes, and awards
effective: 01/01/2025 responsible office: university controller's office
date
approved:
12/18/2024 approval: executive vice president and chief operating
officer
replaces
policy dated:
01/10/2023
responsible
university official:
senior associate vice president and university
controller

fin-1100 – gifts, prizes, and awards
university of richmond | 2
prize
a prize is a cash or non-cash item given at random or as a result of a competition or contest. the prize is not
directly related to job performance or student performance in academic or other realms.
award
an award is a cash or non-cash item given to recognize excellence or to honor an achievement or
accomplishment. the award may be related to job performance or student performance in academic or other
realms.
de minimis
a non-cash gift, prize, or award that is so small and infrequent that accounting for it would be unreasonable or
administratively impractical is considered a de minimis benefit by the internal revenue service (irs). per
irs regulations, cash, gift cards, and gift certificates are never considered de minimis.
fin-1100.2 – policy
gifts
university employees and students
the use of university resources to provide cash gifts (including gift cards or gift certificates) to employees or
students is not permitted.
the use of university resources to provide non-cash gifts to students or employees is generally not permitted,
except in the following limited circumstances, infrequent occasions, and modest amounts (approximately $75
or less):
• expressions of sympathy or support in recognition of a serious illness or death of an employee,
student, or immediate family member;
• ur-logoed merchandise as part of a program or event;
• expressions of congratulations or appreciation in recognition of an academic or professional
milestone, such as graduation or completion of a project of major significance, or completion of term
of service in a university role.
to show appreciation for or recognize a staff member's outstanding service to the university, supervisors are
encouraged to recommend an employee for a bonus payment or other recognition through one of the
university's formal recognition programs administered through human resources.
the use of university resources to provide gifts in recognition of employee service milestones such as
retirement or departure of long-serving employees is permissible and must be coordinated with human
resources to ensure compliance with tax requirements.
the use of university resources to provide gifts in recognition of holidays or personal events (e.g., weddings,
birthdays, or births/adoptions) is not permitted.

fin-1100 – gifts, prizes, and awards
university of richmond | 3
n
on-university individuals
cash payments given to non-university individuals (e.g., honoraria) are considered taxable income and are
not considered a gift or prize. to issue a payment to these individuals, a payment request must be completed
and submitted through workday. the recipient may receive a form 1099-misc or similar tax reporting form
if total calendar year payments exceed the reporting threshold.
when university officials are hosting visitors (individuals who are not university students or employees),
being hosted at an event, or visiting other institutions, university funds may be used to give such visitors a
modest non-cash gift appropriate to the occasion as a sign of appreciation or gratitude.
awards, prizes and incentives
university funds may be used to provide prizes, awards and incentives only under the following
circumstances:
• students may receive departmental academic achievement awards and commencement awards
with approval of the dean or vice president as outlined in fin-2101 policy on provision of
financial resources to students. the type of award (cash, plaque, etc.), value of the award, the
student's name, and the student's university id number must be provided to the financial aid
office and the university controller. the award will be reported as taxable income on form
1099-misc, if total payments reach $600 or more within the calendar year. unless required by the
terms of an endowment, academic achievement awards, commencement awards, and other awards
to students may not be provided as cash or cash equivalents.
• r
andom prizes are allowed for participation in events. the prize may not be a gift card or gift
certificate.
• awa
rds distributed to employees at the annual service awards event or as formal recognition for
teaching, scholarship or service are allowable (e.g., distinguished educator awards).
• g
ift cards or gift certificates (or cash) may be given as incentive to research study participants or
for participation in institutionally sponsored surveys. when gift cards or gift certificates will be
provided in these circumstances, pre-approval from the university controller is required.
the creation of a new prize or award requires approval by president's cabinet and either hr (for faculty/staff
awards) or financial aid (for student awards) and must be established in keeping with all applicable
employment, taxation, and financial aid regulations as well as fin 2101 – policy on provision of financial
resources to students.

fin-1100 – gifts, prizes, and awards
university of richmond | 4
fin-1100.3 – taxation
• the internal revenue service (irs) provides guidelines on the taxability of gifts to employees.
specifically, the irs stipulates that gifts, prizes, or awards to employees must be treated as
compensation, are subject to tax withholding, and are reportable on form w-2.
o gift cards and gift certificates are considered taxable compensation, regardless of the
amount, beginning with the first dollar.
o irs regulations allow for exemption of certain non-cash gifts given during a formal setting
recognizing length of service; such awards are non-taxable within certain parameters.
• gifts, prizes, or awards given to students, or non-university of richmond employees, may be
subject to tax reporting on form1099-misc.
related policies:
fin-4101 policy on use of university funds and financial responsibilities
fin-2101 policy on provision of financial resources to students
fin-4204 policy on business meals and entertainment
fin-16001 reporting and investigating suspected fraud, waste, and abuse policy
gov-1005 policy and procedure on monetary support and cash donations
policy background:
policy was reviewed by academic deans and president's cabinet prior to approval on 12/18/2024
policy was reviewed by academic deans and president's cabinet prior to approval on 01/10/2023.
policy was reviewed by academic deans and president's cabinet prior to approval on 06/13/2019.
policy replaces policy of tax reporting for gifts, prizes, and awards dated 4/8/2016.
policy contacts:
director of strategic sourcing & payments, office of strategic sourcing & payments
director of tax compliance & payroll, payroll office
senior associate vice president and university controller