university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
the purpose of the gifts and gratuities policy is to direct university employees as to how to respond when
presented with a gift or gratuity from a vendor.
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right
to elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
index:
fin-4401.1 ........definitions
fin-4401.2 ........policy statement
fin-4401.3 ........roles and responsibilities
policy statement:
fin-4401.1 – definitions
gifts
a gift is something given voluntarily, without a payment in return, as to show favor toward someone,
honor an occasion, or make a gesture of assistance; a present.
gratuity/gratuities
a gratuity is a gift of money over and above payment due for services; a tip; something given without
claim or demand.
unsolicited
policy #: fin-4401 policy title: gifts and gratuities policy
effective: 07/01/2013 responsible office: procurement and strategic sourcing
date
approved:
07/01/2013
approval: executive vice president and chief operating
officer
replaces
policy dated:
n/a responsible
university official:
senior assoc. vp and university controller

fin-4401 – gifts and gratuities
university of richmond | 2
unsolicited refers to anything received without being requested or asked for.
fin-4401.2 – policy statement
university employees should never accept or solicit, directly or indirectly, anything of economic value as
a gift, gratuity, favor, or entertainment which, is, or may appear to be designed to influence official
conduct in any manner, particularly from a person who is seeking to obtain business or financial
arrangements with the university. cash, checks, coupons for merchandise and gift cards, regardless of
value, should not be accepted.
unsolicited gifts intended for personal or university use, valued under $25 that are tokens of appreciation
and not related to a particular transaction may be accepted. for example: a box of candy, a bag of bagels,
or promotional material such as pens or calendars. always inform your supervisor of any gifts or
gratuities that you have accepted and always follow the university's conflict of interest policy
.
vendors sometime seek to express their appreciation for the university's business through gifts. the best
way for vendors to show their appreciation, however, is to continue to provide high-quality goods and
excellent, reliable services at the best possible prices.
fin-4401.3 – roles and responsibilities
responsibilities of the department
departments that purchase goods and services should ensure that all of their employees are aware of this
policy.
responsibilities of employee
employees should not accept any gifts or gratuities with a value of $25 or more.
related policies:
university conflict of interest policy
policy background:
last reviewed 10/25/2013
policy contacts:
strategic sourcing manager, procurement and strategic sourcing
director of strategic sourcing and payments, office of strategic sourcing and payments