university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
this policy sets forth the university's prohibition of hazing, as defined herein. this policy is designed to
foster compliance with the jeanne clery campus safety act, va. code § 23.1-819 et. seq., va. code § 18.2-
56, and other applicable laws. this policy sets forth the university's process for reporting incidents of hazing,
the process used to investigate incidents of hazing, information on applicable laws on hazing, and the
university's prevention and awareness programs related to hazing.
this policy and related university policies and procedures are not contracts and do not confer contractual
rights upon any individual. the university has the right to amend or modify this policy and related university
policies and procedures from time to time, without prior notice.
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all students, student organizations (as defined herein),
staff, faculty, and applicants for admission. as used in this policy, the term "affiliates" means organizations
or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right to elect the majority of the
entity's governing board.
index:
stu-1001.1 .......definition
stu-1001.2 .......policy
stu-1001.3…...reporting hazing
stu-1001.4…... immunity from certain conduct sanctions when reporting hazing
stu-1001.5...... prevention and awareness training
stu-1001.6…... campus hazing transparency report
policy #: stu-1001
policy title: hazing policy
effective: 06/23/2025 responsible office: center for student involvement
date
approved:
06/20/2025 approval: vice president for student development
replaces
policy dated:
08/15/2022
responsible
university official:
director of student involvement

stu-1001– hazing policy
university of richmond | 2
policy statement:
stu-1001.1 - definitions
hazing means any intentional, knowing, or reckless act committed by a person (whether individually or in
concert with other persons) against another person or persons regardless of the willingness of such other
person or persons to participate, that—
a. is committed in the course of an initiation into, an affiliation with, or the maintenance of
membership in, a student organization; and
b. causes or creates a risk, above the reasonable risk encountered in the course of participation in the
university or the organization (such as the physical preparation necessary for participation in an
athletic team), of physical or psychological injury including but not limited to:
i. hitting, whipping, beating, striking, electronic shocking, placing of a harmful substance on
someone's body, branding, or similar activity;
ii. causing, coercing, or otherwise inducing sleep deprivation, sleeping in inappropriate or
uncomfortable places, or places not in their living space;
iii. causing, coercing, or otherwise inducing exposure to the elements, confinement in a small
space, extreme physical activity, or other similar activity;
iv. causing, coercing, or otherwise inducing another person to consume food, liquid, alcohol,
drugs, or other substances;
v. causing, coercing, or otherwise inducing another person to perform sexual acts or sexually
degrading acts, including stripping, simulation of sexual acts, improper touching, or sexually
explicit chants and songs;
vi. causing, coercing, or otherwise inducing participation in humiliating, intimidating, or
superfluous/unnecessary demeaning acts, including but not limited to getting a tattoo,
shaving their head, wearing unusual clothing, or personal servitude, including, but not limited
to running personal errands;
vii. any activity that places another person in reasonable fear of bodily harm through the use of
threatening words or conduct;
viii. any activity against another person that includes a criminal violation of local, state, tribal, or
federal law or a violation of university policy; and
ix. any activity that induces, causes, or requires another person to perform a duty or task that
involves a criminal violation of local, state, tribal, or federal law or a violation of
university policy.
registered student organization is defined in the university of richmond
registered student organization
handbook.
student organization means, for purposes of this policy, all student organizations, regardless of whether the
organization is a registered student organization or is otherwise recognized by the university, including but
not limited to fraternities, sororities, clubs, societies, associations, club sports, and athletic teams.
student organizations with delayed recruitment or membership means, for purposes of this policy, a
registered student organization that imposes a period of time between invitation for membership and being
initiated or formally recognized as a member. these organizations meet the definition of a "student
organization with new members" under virginia code §23.1-819. university athletic teams are not student
organizations with delayed recruitment or membership.

stu-1001– hazing policy
university of richmond | 3
stu-1001.2 – policy
hazing is prohibited by the university.
except as noted below, any report of hazing shall be investigated and adjudicated pursuant to the procedures
set forth in the university's standards of student conduct
. if a report of hazing involves potential sexual
misconduct, it will be investigated under the procedures set forth in the university's policy on prohibiting
and responding to sexual harassment/sexual misconduct – students and the policy on prohibiting and
responding to sexual harassment/sexual misconduct – faculty and staff. if a report of hazing involves a
faculty or staff member, then such report shall be investigated and adjudicated pursuant to the faculty
handbook or the applicable human resources policy.
the potential sanctions imposed for a violation of this policy are set forth in the standards of student conduct
and, with respect to faculty or staff, the faculty handbook and/or other human resources policies. for
individual students, such sanctions may include suspension or permanent separation from the university.
additionally, student-athletes found responsible for hazing may face additional sanctions imposed by their
head coach, sport administrator and/or the director of athletics, pursuant to the student athlete handbook.
for registered student organizations found responsible for hazing, sanctions may include revocation of
organization registration, revocation of permission to meet on campus or to use campus facilities, and/or
revocation of the right to exist at the university of richmond.
it is unlawful to haze any student at the university of richmond. any person found guilty thereof shall be
guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. as such, any victim is also encouraged to report a hazing incident to the
university of richmond police department.
stu-1001.3 – reporting hazing
reports of hazing can be made directly to the center for student involvement or using the hazing incident
report form.
all campus security authorities (as designated by the university pursuant to jeanne clery act), advisors to
registered student organizations, and all coaches and athletic administrators for university athletic teams are
required to promptly report allegations of or information regarding potential hazing.
all members of the campus community are encouraged to make a prompt, good faith report of actual or
potential hazing.
stu-1001.4 – immunity from certain conduct sanctions when reporting hazing
in order to encourage reporting of hazing, the u niversity will not charge a student under the standards of
student conduct for violations of the alcohol, tobacco, and other drug polic y, that involve the
consumption of alcohol, public intoxication, or ingestion of illegal drugs if the student discloses such
violations in connection with a prompt and good faith report of hazing or while participating, in good
faith, in an investigation o r hearing process involving allegations or charges of hazing.
the university will not charge a student under the standards of student conduct for hazing if such
student is a bystander to and does not participate in such hazing and makes a prompt report of hazing in
the manner specified by this policy or to the university police department.

stu-1001– hazing policy
university of richmond | 4
this provision does not apply to allegations of more serious conduct such as physical abuse of another or
illicit drug or alcohol distribution , or direct participation i n or encouragement of hazing . the university
also considers retaliation against parties and witnesses to be a serious violation and will investigate and
hold accountable students found to have retaliated against another student as a result of that student' s
reporting of, or participation in an investigation or adjudication of, hazing.
stu-1001.5 – prevention and awareness training
the university will conduct in-person hazing prevention and awareness training that includes, among other
topics, the dangers of hazing, including alcohol intoxication, applicable hazing laws, the content of this policy
and other applicable policies, the university's conduct process for hazing, and the fact that the conduct
process is not a substitute for a criminal investigation or prosecution.
all new students are required to participate in hazing prevention training provided by the university during
new student orientation. such hazing prevention training may be included in new student orientation or in
other forums.
all current and new members of student organizations with delayed recruitment or membership (as defined
in this policy) are required to participate in hazing prevention training provided by the university.
all advisors for student organizations with delayed membership (as defined in this policy) are required to
participate in hazing prevention training provided by the university.
stu-1001.6 – campus hazing transparency report
the university will publish a report (the "campus hazing transparency report") summarizing findings
concerning any student organization found to be in violation of this policy. the campus hazing
transparency report will be publicly available on the university's website and shall be updated at least two
times per year to include incidents involving a student organization for which a finding of responsibility was
issued.
the campus hazing transparency report shall include: (i) the name of the student organization, (ii) a
general description of the violation that resulted in a finding of responsibility, including whether the violation
involved the abuse or illegal use of alcohol or drugs, the findings of the university, and any sanctions placed
on the student organization by the university, as applicable; and (iii) the dates on which the incident was
alleged to have occurred, the investigation into the incident was initiated, the investigation ended with a
finding that a hazing violation occurred, and the institution provided notice to the student organization that the
incident resulted in a hazing violation.
in addition to the campus hazing transparency report, the university will publish, in a prominent location
on the university's public website, hazing information including: (i) a statement notifying the public of the
annual availability of statistics on hazing, including a link to such report; (ii) information about the
university's hazing policy and applicable local, state, and tribal laws on hazing; and (iii) the information
included in each update of the campus hazing transparency report.
the university shall maintain campus hazing transparency reports for a period of 5 calendar years from the
date of publication of such update.

stu-1001– hazing policy
university of richmond | 5
related policies:
university of richmond standards of student conduct
university of richmond student-athlete handbook
gov-3103 policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment/sexual misconduct – students
gov-3104 policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment/sexual misconduct – faculty and
staff
stu-1002 alcohol, tobacco, and other drug policy
policy background:
previous policy dated 8/15/2018
policy revised in 2022 and 2025 to ensure compliance with virginia code §23.1-819 et seq.
policy revised in june 2025 to ensure compliance with the stop campus hazing act (20 u.s.c. §1092(f)).
policy contacts:
vice president for student development
director of student involvement