university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
the purpose of this policy is to articulate a formal policy regarding health entrance requirements to ensure the
necessary information is obtained in a timely manner to protect the public health of the ur community this
policy is consistent with the virginia law on required immunizations that is applicable to public institutions of
higher education.
scope:
this policy applies to all degree-seeking undergraduate students in arts & sciences, robins school of
business and the jepson school of leadership studies. it also applies to full-time undergraduate and graduate
students new to the university of richmond, regardless of whether they are degree-seeking. non degree-
seeking students who enroll full-time in a summer semester and do not enroll in any subsequent semester are
exempted from these requirements.
index:
stu-2001.1 .......policy statement
stu-2001.2 .......process
stu-2001.3 .......applicable regulations & accreditation standards
policy statement:
policy #: stu-2001
policy title: health and immunization record policy
effective: 07/01/2019 responsible office: student health center
date
approved:
06/25/2019 approval: executive vice president & provost
replaces
policy dated:
06/01/2018 responsible
university official:
associate vp for health and well-being

stu-2001 – health and immunization record policy
university of richmond | 2
stu-2001.1 policy statement
full-time undergraduate and graduate students new to the university of richmond and all degree-seeking
undergraduate students in arts & sciences, the robins school of business, and the jepson school of
leadership studies, must complete a university-approved tuberculosis risk assessment form and
immunization questionnaire that includes documented evidence, provided by a licensed health professional or
health facility, of the diseases for which the student has been immunized, the numbers of doses given, the date
on which the immunization was administered and any additional immunizations. students may be exempted
from obtaining required immunizations if they object to the immunizations on religious grounds or if they
have a medical exemption.
stu-2001.2 process
the required documentation must be submitted by july 15 for fall admission and january 15 for spring
admission for review by the student health center staff. any student with insufficient records will be
contacted via a secure message in their patient portal with specific instructions for satisfactorily completing
the process.
any student with incomplete records after three weeks of classes will have a hold applied to their student
account to block registration for next semester classes. the hold will remain in place until all record
requirements are met.
stu-2001.3 applicable regulations & accreditation standards
code of virginia
title 23.1. institutions of higher education; other educational and cultural institutions chapter 8. health and
campus safety
§ 23.1-800. health histories and immunizations required; exemptions.
policy background:
the current policy replaces the original policy dated 06/01/2018
the 2019 revisions were reviewed by president's cabinet prior to approval.
prior to approval, the original policy was reviewed by president's cabinet and the deans of the five schools.
non-substantive change to policy regarding documentation deadlines made on 2/13/2020; 11/2/2022
policy contacts:
associate vice president for health and well-being
university medical director