university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
to establish a framework that facilitates appropriate access by authorized individuals and entities to university
electronic systems, data, and resources at the right time, and for legitimate academic, research, and
administrative purposes.
scope:
this policy applies to anyone who accesses university of richmond (ur) data, electronic systems, software
applications, or data networks as well as those who design, implement, or manage associated information
services.
index:
irm-4009.1 .......definitions
irm-4009.2 .......policy statement
irm-4009.3 .......roles and responsibilities
policy statement:
irm-4009.1 – definitions
policy #: irm-4009
policy title: identity and access management policy
effective: 10/10/2025 responsible office: information services
date
approved:
10/10/2025 approval: vice president for information services and
chief information officer
replaces
policy dated:
n/a
responsible
university official:
vice president for information services and
chief information officer

irm-4009 – identity and access management policy
university of richmond | 2
access: access is the ability to utilize various university electronic systems, services, and resources. this
includes accessing cloud- and campus-hosted data and applications, data networks, computing devices, and
others.
application: software designed to address various needs, ranging from simple utilities and productivity tools
to complex enterprise system solutions. typically, they have a user interface that allows people to digitally
interact with them, and they may also rely on data processing, storage and communication functionality to
accomplish their intended purpose.
authentication: authentication is the process by which an electronic system or software application confirms
that a person or device really is who or what it is claiming to be and through which access to the requested
resource is authorized. strong authentication protocols help both to protect personal and university
information and prevent misuse of university resources.
authorization: authorizations are implicit or explicit permissions to use a resource associated with a digital
account. once the user of an account is authenticated, a system or resource determines if the person requesting
access is authorized to use it.
deprovisioning: the removal of computing accounts associated with an identity. the process can be
automated or manual, or a mixture of both.
directory services: systems for storing and maintaining information about identities and resources. directory
services are often referred to as directories, user stores, or identity stores, and they store information such as
usernames, passwords, and user preferences. directory services are used to provision user accounts, manage
access privileges and monitor and control access to software applications. active directory and openldap
are two examples of directory services.
entitlements: entitlements, also known as authorizations, privileges, or permissions, are access policies used
to manage electronic access to data, information services, and software applications. they define what a given
identity is authorized to access and what actions can be performed.
• birthright entitlements are granted automatically either implicitly or explicitly in the account
creation process and are often related to an individual's affiliation with the university (e.g.,
employee, student, alumni).
• application entitlements are requested by an individual but require approval by an application
owner or data steward before being granted.
identity: digital credentials and characteristics that uniquely represent a person, device, or application within
an organization's network. a digital identity can consist of multiple accounts, credentials, and entitlements
associated with a single entity or person.
identity and access management (iam): a security and business discipline that combines policies, processes,
and technologies to ensure the right people or devices gain appropriate access to the right assets at the right
time for the right reasons, while preventing unauthorized access and fraud.
least privilege: the principle of least privilege dictates that users should be granted the minimum necessary
access rights to perform their tasks and nothing more. this security concept aims to minimize potential
damage from compromised accounts, accidental errors, or malicious attacks by limiting the scope of
permissions.
multi-factor authentication (mfa): multi-factor authentication (mfa) is a security measure that requires
users to provide more than one form of identification to access an account or system. mfa is a layered
approach to security that makes it harder for unauthorized users to gain access to a system, even if one
credential is compromised.

irm-4009 – identity and access management policy
university of richmond | 3
permissions: specific operations or actions that an authenticated user or entity is allowed to perform on a
resource or system. permissions are a fundamental part of authorization, which determines what an
authenticated user can do, after authentication verifies who they are. permissions are typically assigned to
roles, which are then assigned to users, creating a system of access control.
privileges: the right of an account to perform certain actions on pieces of data in an information service.
elevated privileges are rights that exceed the privileges of a typical user of the system.
provisioning: the creation, ongoing maintenance, and removal of computing accounts associated with an
identity. the process can be automated or manual, or a mixture of both.
service accounts: a service account is used when it is necessary for electronic systems or software
applications to authenticate to other electronic systems or software applications without any association with a
person.
user accounts: a user account is a unique identity assigned to a specific person that allows that person to
access a computer, network, or software application. the account may either exist in a central repository to
which software applications may connect to consume identity and authentication information, or it may be
managed locally on an information system or device.
irm-4009.2 – policy statement
1. accounts
a. user accounts: when supported by the system or application, all user accounts should be
created centrally in the directory services repositories hosted by information services. if the
system or application does not support central authentication, then accounts may be created
locally, in which case the creation, deletion, and maintenance of local accounts is the sole
responsibility of the appropriate application owner(s).
b. service accounts: these accounts should be created sparingly and documented. their use must
be reviewed annually. the password requirements for service accounts must be no less
stringent than those for user accounts. service accounts may not be used by individuals to
authenticate. after initial testing, service accounts must be configured to be non-interactive if
possible.
c. privileged accounts: certain accounts may have extra privileges related to the management of
a device or application. administrative privilege can be added to either user or service account
types. privileged accounts must utilize multifactor authentication (mfa) if that security
capability can be configured for the relevant system or application. accounts with elevated
privileges must be closely monitored by information services and/or application owners for
potential abuse.
2. authentication
information services (is) maintains centralized authentication services for the use of both on-premise
and cloud-based applications. these services are enumerated in the authentication standard associated
with this policy. in addition to traditional password-based authentication, is also provides a centralized
multifactor authentication (mfa) service.

irm-4009 – identity and access management policy
university of richmond | 4
some software applications support their own local credential stores for the purpose of user
authentication. this method is often referred to as native or application-level authentication.
applications that are small in scope, with a very limited number of users, may be configured for local
authentication. however, central authentication is always preferred. the operational department creating
local accounts must define the procedures by which local accounts will be approved and created. the
procedures must be consistent with this policy as well as with the university's acceptable use policy
.
3. authorization
the management and maintenance of authorizations is a shared responsibility of information services
and local application administrators and data stewards. all authorizations must be granted in accordance
with the concept of least privilege. only authorizations that are necessary to perform job tasks should be
granted. all others should be denied/disabled.
4. provisioning
a. birthright entitlements: when an account is created in the university's central identity system,
certain authorizations are immediately created with it, such as the ability to authenticate against
ur's enterprise authentication systems, access to ur's data network, and several online
resources. accounts are granted these authorizations automatically during the account creation
process managed by information services and are often related to an individual's affiliation
with the university. changes in affiliation will automatically result in changes to birthright
entitlements.
b. requestable entitlements: these are entitlements that are requested by an individual but that
require approval by an application owner or data steward before being granted. all requests
should be made, tracked, and fulfilled through the online ticketing application (e.g.,
spidertechnet) maintained by information services.
c. deprovisioning: information systems shall be designed and deployed in a way that facilitates
timely removal of a person's authorizations and accounts at appropriate times.
d. centrally managed accounts and authorizations: enterprise level accounts or authorizations
that are listed in the enterprise directory service and have authentication credentials in ur's
enterprise authentication services shall be deprovisioned in accordance with the
user life
cycle standard associated with this policy.
e. local accounts and authorizations: when accounts or authorizations are created outside of the
central enterprise authentication system, the operational department creating the accounts must
define a mechanism to deprovision the accounts in a timely fashion (generally within a few
business days unless a specific time frame is requested) and consistent with the conditions
expressed in the associated
user life cycle standard.
note: deprovisioning local accounts must occur promptly upon role change, separation, or
termination. it is insufficient to rely on central deprovisioning of accounts as a method of
terminating locally deployed authorizations, as the timeliness of account deprovisioning is
dependent on factors that are beyond the control of local application administrators.
irm-4009.3 –roles and responsibilities
information services – information technology experts dedicated to maintaining identity management
systems that centrally manage digital accounts shall have the following responsibilities:

irm-4009 – identity and access management policy
university of richmond | 5
• create, remove, and maintain digital accounts in centralized enterprise directory services.
• create, remove, and monitor central service accounts.
• create, remove, and monitor central privileged accounts.
• provide and maintain centralized authentication services, including multi-factor authentication.
• manage and maintain authorizations for enterprise software applications.
• manage and maintain a service that grants and revokes birthright entitlements, as appropriate.
• manage and maintain a service for requestable entitlements.
• manage and maintain an auditing service
• maintain a list of enterprise and departmental applications and their respective application
owners (available upon request)
human resources – serves as the authoritative source for faculty, staff, student worker, retiree,
contractor, and volunteer employment data. humans resources has the following responsibilities:
• ensures timely and accurate entry and update of personnel records in the employee system-of-
record to trigger corresponding identity life cycle events for employees (e.g., account
provisioning, role changes, and deprovisioning).
• collaborates with information services to verify employment data changes are correctly
reflected in identity and access management systems in accordance with institutional policy and
regulatory requirements.
• notifies information security immediately of any urgent employee account termination needs
(e.g., involuntary separations).
registrar's office – serves as the authoritative source for student academic status and enrollment data.
the registrar's office has the following responsibilities:
• ensures timely and accurate entry and update of student records in the student information
system-of-record to trigger corresponding identity life cycle events for students (e.g., account
provisioning, status changes, and deprovisioning).
• collaborates with information services to verify student data changes are correctly reflected in
identity and access management systems in accordance with institutional policy and regulatory
requirements.
• notifies information security immediately of any urgent student account termination needs.
application owners – for purposes of this policy, application owners are typically operational managers
in a functional area responsible for the administration of a departmental software application or
computer system. application owners shall have the following responsibilities:
• manage and maintain all local accounts required on software applications or computer systems
that they administer (i.e., provisioning, deprovisioning, auditing, etc.)

irm-4009 – identity and access management policy
university of richmond | 6
• review and approve requests for access to software applications or computer systems that they
administer.
data stewards – data stewards are typically senior operational managers in a functional area responsible
for a data stewardship domain as defined by the university's administrative data management policy.
data stewards shall have the following responsibilities:
• review and approve requests for access to data in their assigned data stewardship domain.
data management committee – the data management committee (dmc) is a university-wide
committee primarily composed of data stewards and data supervisors. the dmc is co-chaired by the
director, institutional effectiveness and the assistant vice president for systems and networks. the
dmc shall have the following responsibilities:
• reviewing the operational effectiveness of identity and access management policies and
procedures and making recommendations for improvement and change.
• providing oversight of all university processes and systems which create, maintain, and report
on identity and access management data.
• ensuring regular and appropriate collaborative communication with the it governance
steering committee on operational changes related to identity and access management that
may impact business processes.
related policies:
irm-4004 - data security policy
irm-4008 - access to electronic files policy
irm-4007 - administrative data management policy
irm-2001 - acceptable use policy
irm-4003 - information security policy
policy background:
policy approved on 10/10/2025 following review by president's cabinet
policy contacts:
vice president for information services and chief information officer