university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
this policy describes the different situations under which the regular on campus operating schedule may be
modified due to inclement weather and the responsibility of the employee in those situations.
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right
to elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
index:
hrm-5003.1 .....definitions
hrm-5003.2 .....policy statement
policy statement:
hrm-5003.1 – definitions
essential personnel
staff and faculty who, due to the nature of the services they provide, are expected to physically report to
perform work on campus during inclement weather and other situations in which the normal on-campus
schedule is suspended. such departments or essential employees are designated in advance by the relevant
executive vice president, vice president or academic dean.
non-essential personnel
staff and faculty who are not expected to physically report to work on campus during a time when the
regular on-campus operating schedule is modified.
policy #: hrm-5003 policy title: inclement weather and emergencies policy
effective: 01/11/2024 responsible office: human resources
date
approved:
01/11/2024
approval: executive vice president and chief operating
officer
replaces
policy dated:
07/15/2018 responsible
university official:
chief human resources officer

hrm-5003 – inclement weather and emergencies
university of richmond | 2
continuity personnel
faculty and staff identified by their department's director, dean, or chair who are recorded in their
department's, division's, or unit's continuity of operations (coop) plan as being required to perform
critical functions during activation of the coop plan.
emergency personnel
faculty and staff whose job duties affect the security, safety, or physical operation of the university, and
are part of the incident management team or executive policy group or required to work in the
emergency operations center or community assistance center, even when normal campus operations
have been suspended.
delay
all classes, events, and activities will be cancelled during the time preceding the announced time for
delayed opening. residential facilities will remain open.
cancellation
classes, events, and activities will not be held after the announced cancellation time. in extraordinary
circumstances, certain events may be held when all other campus activities are cancelled. notice of those
events will be provided to the affected employees and participants. faculty members have the discretion to
complete classes that are in session at the time of a cancellation. residential facilities will remain open.
closing
this occurs when extreme conditions require the closing of residential facilities. no classes, events or
activities will be scheduled during a closing.
hrm-5003.2 – policy
as a residential institution, the university is committed to a year-round operating schedule. it is the intent
of the university to remain open and adhere to full operations, including normal class schedules,
whenever possible. commuting students, faculty, and staff should always exercise their best judgment
with regard to road conditions and other safety concerns.
if weather conditions or other emergencies make it impossible to maintain an ordinary level of on campus
academic activity and business functions, the university may alter the daily schedule. this is expected to
be infrequent, and consideration will always be given to maintaining appropriate service levels in
departments that provide essential services to the university community.
supervisors of employees providing essential services should clearly communicate the work attendance
requirements during severe weather or other emergency conditions, regardless of media announcements of
university closings, cancellations or delays.
unless otherwise instructed by your manager, as a general rule nonessential personnel are not expected to
work remotely during severe weather or other emergency conditions. however, employees should expect
that there may be emergent or continued business that requires some remote work during such disruptions.
in rare instances when disruptions extend beyond one day, direction will be provided, and remote work
would likely be necessary.

hrm-5003 – inclement weather and emergencies
university of richmond | 3
communication of university status changes
if possible, official announcements of delayed openings or cancellations due to inclement weather or other
emergency conditions, will be communicated by 6:00 a.m. or earlier via the communications channels
below.
weather-related closings, cancellations, and delays for the university of richmond are broadcast by local
radio and television stations, including public radio station wcve (88.9). faculty, staff and students will
receive closing, delay, or cancellation information through their university email. this information will
also be posted at publicsafety.richmond.edu/ and can be found by calling the emergency hotline at
804.289.8760. updates and status changes will be communicated by the same channels.
this policy pertains to faculty and staff whose primary work location is on campus and does not cover
employees affected by inclement weather or other emergencies at off-campus locations, which do not
impact campus operations. employees affected by such emergencies and unable to work should work
with their supervisor to assess whether vacation time is appropriate or if alternative arrangements can be
made to ensure work continuity.
related policies:
inclement weather time reporting and pay policy
sec-2002 designation of personnel for emergencies
policy background:
policy dated 07/01/2010
revised policy effective 12/15/2014
current policy reviewed by president's cabinet prior to taking effect on 07/15/2018
non-substantive changes made on 2/1/2022 and on 10/9/2023
revisions related essential personnel. revised policy approved and effective 1/11/2024
policy contacts:
chief human resources officer
director of emergency management