university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
the purpose of this policy is to provide clarity on university payment during inclement weather days for both
essential and non-essential personnel.
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right
to elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
index:
hrm-5006.1 .....definitions
hrm-5006.2 .....policy statement
hrm-5006.3 .....non-exempt essential staff
hrm-5006.4….non-exempt, non-essential staff
hrm-5006.5…. exempt essential and non-essential employees
policy statement:
hrm-5006.1 – definitions
essential personnel: employees who, due to the nature of the services they provide, are expected to
physically report to work on campus during inclement weather and other situations in which the normal
policy #: hrm-5006
policy title: inclement weather time reporting and pay
policy
effective: 10/30/2024 responsible office: human resources
date
approved:
10/30/2024
approval: evp and chief operating officer
replaces
policy dated:
07/01/2021 responsible
university official:
chief human resources officer

hrm-5006 – inclement weather time reporting and pay policy
university of richmond | 2
schedule is suspended. such departments or essential employees are designated in advance by the relevant
division's leader, vice president or academic dean.
non-essential personnel: staff and faculty who are not expected to physically report to work on campus
during an early dismissal, cancellation, or delayed opening.
hrm-5006.2 – policy statement
the university may alter the daily schedule if weather conditions or other emergencies make it impossible to maintain
normal on-campus academic activity and business functions. in the event of inclement weather or another emergency
causing an early dismissal, cancellation or delayed opening of university activities, the university will provide
inclement weather pay to both essential and non-essential personnel as outlined below.
hrm-5006.3 –non-exempt essential staff
non-exempt essential staff required to work during an early dismissal, cancellation or delayed opening will
receive inclement weather pay, equivalent to their regular pay rate, in addition to regular pay.
• delayed opening: an essential non-exempt staff member whose normal workday starts before the delayed
opening will be paid regular pay and inclement weather pay for each hour worked from their regularly scheduled
start time through the delay.
• early dismissal: an essential non-exempt staff member required to work during the early dismissal will receive
regular pay and inclement weather pay for each hour worked while university activities are canceled.
all hours physically worked (regular pay) during an inclement weather event shall be considered time worked for
overtime compensation purposes.
if unforeseen circumstances prevent essential non-exempt staff from reporting to work during an early
dismissal, cancellation or delayed opening, they must call in prior to the start of their shift (based on
departmental guidelines for providing advance notice). if approved, pay for this time taken will be considered
inclement weather pay. if there is no advance notice, then normal departmental pay procedures will apply.
hrm-5006.4 – non-exempt non-essential staff
non-exempt non-essential staff are not expected to physically report to work during an early closing, cancellation, or
delayed opening. inclement weather pay equivalent to an employee's regular pay rate will be paid instead of regular pay
in this instance. employees on previously approved leave will be allowed to change the previously approved leave to
inclement weather pay.
in rare circumstances, non-essential, non-exempt staff may be required by their manager to work on campus or remotely
to ensure that time-sensitive or urgent tasks are completed. in such circumstances, these employees will receive
inclement weather pay, equivalent to their regular pay rate, in addition to their regular pay for any hours worked.
non-exempt non-essential staff who choose to physically report to work when the university's normal on-campus
schedule is suspended are not entitled to inclement weather pay but will receive regular pay. student employees are not
expected to physically report to work during an early dismissal, cancellation, or delayed opening and are not entitled to
inclement weather pay.

hrm-5006 – inclement weather time reporting and pay policy
university of richmond | 3
hrm-5006.5 – exempt essential and non-essential employees
exempt staff and faculty, regardless of whether they are required to be on campus during inclement weather or other
situations in which the normal on-campus schedule is suspended will receive regular pay during inclement weather
events.
employees on previously approved leave will be allowed to change the previously approved leave to regular pay.
all employees
if an employee is unable to report to work at the expected time, they must notify their supervisor, explain the
reason for the absence, and provide an estimated time of arrival at work.
when an employee misses additional work time beyond the time announced for the early dismissal,
cancellation or delayed opening, or concludes that they must leave work early even when no cancellation has
been announced, the employee shall report their time accurately as worked. employees may take vacation
time for the missed time, if they so choose. with permission from their supervisor, they may telecommute
(work from home), if their work can be accomplished remotely.
options
• make up the time missed in the same work week with supervisory approval;
• take leave for the missed time;
• take leave without pay for the missed time if other leave time is not available (non-exempt); or
• telecommute (work from home) if authorized by the appropriate supervisor.
related policies:
hrm-5003 inclement weather and emergencies policy
policy background:
university policy existed prior to 2007
non-substantive revisions for clarification in 2021 for inclusion in the library.
policy reviewed by president's cabinet on 10/28/24 and approved on 10/30/24.
policy contacts:
chief human resources officer