university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right
to elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
index:
fin-1201.1 ........definitions
fin-1201.2 ........policy
policy statement:
fin-1201.1 – definitions
indirect or facilities and administrative (f&a) costs: costs that are incurred for common or joint
objectives and, therefore, cannot be readily and specifically identified with a particular sponsored project,
instructional activity, or other institutional activity; synonymous with "overhead" costs. utilities, physical
space, and accounting services are examples of f&a costs.
gift: contribution from a private, non-governmental source, made without expectation of any product or
service of a tangible or intangible nature in return.
grant: external award supporting research, public service or scholarly activity at the university that has a
defined scope of work and set of objectives which provide a basis for accountability and sponsor
expectations.
policy #: fin-1201 policy title: indirect costs recovery policy
effective: 08/24/2023 responsible office: office of foundation, corporate, and
government relations
date
approved:
08/23/2023
approval: executive vice president & chief operating
officer
replaces
policy dated:
11/01/2016 responsible
university official:
assistant vice president for foundation,
corporate and government relations

fin-1201 – indirect costs recovery policy
university of richmond | 2
fin-1201.2 – policy
facilities and administrative (f&a), or indirect, costs are awarded to reimburse the university for
expenses incurred in support of sponsored research and training activities. it is the university's policy to
recover the full amount of indirect costs allowable by a granting agency, whether public or private.
the university periodically negotiates a federal f&a reimbursement rate with the u.s. department of
health and human services. the university of richmond's current f&a cost rate, applied to salaries,
wages, and fringe benefits, is 52 percent on campus and 23 percent off campus, which is used if more than
50 percent of a project is performed off campus. faculty who are preparing proposals should contact the
office of foundation, corporate and government relations to verify this rate, which is subject to change.
exceptions:
philanthropic gifts are exempt from this policy. grants made by funding agencies, both public and private,
with policies explicitly stating that they do not pay f&a costs will also be exempt from this policy.
faculty seeking an exception to the university's standard indirect cost recovery policy must receive
approval from both the evp and provost and the evp and chief operating officer. during the proposal
preparation process, faculty intending to seek an exception should alert the office of foundation,
corporate and government relations, so that their request and justification may be routed accordingly.
note: private funding agencies may allow direct charges for f&a costs otherwise not allowed by federal
agencies. in this case, faculty members are encouraged to include f&a under the direct cost section of the
proposed budget.
related policies:
fin-1202: research incentive accounts policy
policy background:
this policy came into effect in july 2011 when the research incentive account program officially began.
updated november 2016
policy updated in annual review. f&a cost revised from 53 to 52%. revision approved on 08/23/23.
policy contacts:
assistant vice president for foundation, corporate, and government relations