university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
the purpose of this policy is to set forth the procedure for timely identification, commercial development and
protection of faculty and staff created works and inventions. the policy will also provide some individuals an
opportunity to share in returns that result from works and/or inventions used in a commercial manner.
scope:
this policy covers all university personnel, including without limitation faculty, administrators, office and
technical staff, students, visitors, contractors, consultants and all others whose primary work affiliation is with
the university, whether compensated by the university or not. university personnel are covered to the extent
their creative work involves the use of university resources such as space, facilities, equipment, staff or funds
as more fully explained below.
all intellectual property produced by university personnel is covered by this policy, whether or not the
subject matter is protected under patent, trademark, trade secret or copyright laws. intellectual property
includes without limitation all inventions, creative works, patentable and non-patentable subject matter,
copyrightable materials, know-how, electronic and paper documents, trademarks, service marks, logos, team
colors, mascots, designs, software (including source code and object code), multimedia or audiovisual
materials and photographs.
index:
acd-5101.1 ......background
policy #: acd-5101 policy title: intellectual property
effective: 12/13/2002 responsible office: foundation, corporate, and government
relations
date
approved:
12/13/2002 approval: board of trustees
replaces
policy dated:
05/10/2002 responsible
university official:
assistant vice president of foundation,
corporate, and government relations

acd-5101 – intellectual property
university of richmond | 2
acd-5101.2 ......patents and trade secrets
acd-5101.3 ......copyrights
acd-5101.4 ......trademarks
acd-5101.5 ......grievances and amendments
acd-5101.6 ......appendices
acd-5101.7 ......applicable regulations and accreditation standards
policy statement:
acd-5101.1 – background
this is a collection of policies, guidelines and general information related to patents, trade secrets,
copyrights, trademarks and other intellectual issues at the university of richmond (the "university"). the
university wishes to recognize and support the creative endeavors of its faculty, students and staff by
providing certain resources, information and assistance consistent with this policy.
the university also has an interest in identifying works and inventions that may be of commercial value
to the university. the purpose of this policy is to set forth the procedure for timely identification,
commercial development and protection of faculty and staff created works and inventions. the policy will
also provide some individuals an opportunity to share in returns that result from works and/or inventions
used in a commercial manner.
who is covered? this policy covers all university personnel, including without limitation faculty,
administrators, office and technical staff, students, visitors, contractors, consultants and all others whose
primary work affiliation is with the university, whether compensated by the university or not. university
personnel are covered to the extent their creative work involves the use of university resources such as
space, facilities, equipment, staff or funds as more fully explained below.
what is covered? all intellectual property produced by university personnel is covered by this policy,
whether or not the subject matter is protected under patent, trademark, trade secret or copyright laws.
intellectual property includes without limitation all inventions, creative works, patentable and non-
patentable subject matter, copyrightable materials, know-how, electronic and paper documents,
trademarks, service marks, logos, team colors, mascots, designs, software (including source code and
object code), multimedia or audiovisual materials and photographs.
acd-5101.2 – patents and trade secrets
i. background
a. what is a patent?
a patent is a grant issued by the united states government giving an inventor the right to
exclude all others from making, using, selling or importing the subject matter defined in the
claims of the patent throughout the united states, its territories and possessions for a period of
20 years from the date the application is filed.
patentable subject matter is limited to new or improved processes, apparatus, products or
compositions of matter. patent protection may be obtained for the invention of mechanical,

acd-5101 – intellectual property
university of richmond | 3
electrical, chemical and other kinds of devices, tools, processes, or even methods of operating a
computer to perform a series of sequential functions. however, mathematical algorithms or mere
mental steps are not patentable.
filing a patent application requires public disclosure of the invention. for this reason, inventors
sometimes elect instead to protect an invention by relying on trade secret laws.
when a patent application is filed, the u.s. patent and trademark office reviews it to ascertain if
the invention is new, useful and non-obvious and, if appropriate, grants a patent - usually two to
five years later. not all patents are necessarily valuable or impervious to challenge. general
information concerning patents is available through the
united states patent and trademark
office.
the university's patent rights may be seriously impaired if the invention is disclosed outside the
university, offered for sale, or commercially exploited before an application is filed in the u. s.
patent and trademark office. if such activities occur more than one year before an application is
filed, all u.s. patent rights are lost. in most foreign countries, however, this one-year grace
period does not exist. in many countries, foreign patent rights may be lost immediately upon the
first instance of disclosure of commercial exploitation if a patent application is not already on
file.
b. what is a trade secret?
trade secrets are defined and protected under various state laws. these laws protect secret
business information against unauthorized use or disclosure by one who obtained the information
through improper means or through a confidential relationship. a trade secret consists of
information that: (a) derives economic value from not being generally known to others, and (b) is
the subject of reasonable efforts to maintain its secrecy. information generally known to the
public or easily learned by proper means is not a trade secret. trade secrets may be used to
protect forms of intellectual property which do not readily fall under the scope of trademark,
copyright or patent law protections. trade secrets may be protected as long as the owner
successfully prevents them from becoming widely known. if information becomes common
knowledge, it ceases to be a trade secret. for this reason, the university's faculty and staff must
take care not to disclose to others outside the university ideas which may be valuable.
trade secrets may or may not be patentable. however, agencies sponsoring research at the
university usually require reports of all inventions, whether or not they are considered
patentable.
ii. patent and trade secret policy
a. responsibility for disclosure
university personnel who alone or in association with others create any patentable subject matter
or any non-patentable trade secret ("university invention") with the use of university resources
are responsible for disclosing the university invention to the university. such disclosure shall be
made when it can be reasonably concluded that a university invention has been created, and
sufficiently in advance of any publications, presentation or other public disclosure to allow time
for possible action that protects rights to the university invention for the creator and the
university.
b. determination of rights

acd-5101 – intellectual property
university of richmond | 4
except as set forth below, the creator of a university invention shall retain his/her rights, and the
university shall not assert ownership rights. the university will assert ownership rights to a
university invention developed under any of the following circumstances:
1. development was funded by an externally sponsored research program or by any
agreement which allocates rights to the university.
2. development required use of university resources (e.g., facilities, equipment, funding) or
more than minimal use of university personnel. (the university has rights to a
university invention derived from research carried out with any use of the university's
resources. however, a university invention developed independently by the creator
outside of normal duties associated with the creator's position and with no use of
university resources is vested with the creator and/or with the organization whose
resources were used.)
3. the creator was assigned, directed or specifically funded by the university to develop the
material.
4. material was developed by administrators or staff in the course of employment duties and
constitutes work for hire under u.s. law.
iii. patent and trade secret procedures
a. assistant vice president, foundation, corporate, and government relations
the assistant vice president, foundation, corporate and government relations is responsible
for reviewing the terms and conditions of the university's grants and contracts for compliance
with university policies on intellectual property rights and secrecy in research.
a part of the mission of foundation, corporate and government relations is to promote the
transfer of university technology for society's use and benefit while generating unrestricted
income to support research and education. foundation, corporate and government relations is
responsible for the administration of the university's invention reporting and licensing program,
the commercial evaluation of inventions, the filing of patents upon the recommendation of the
intellectual property committee, making petitions to agencies for greater rights in inventions,
and negotiating licensing agreements with industry.
b. invention evaluation and protection process
the ideas and inventions of university personnel are part of the university's intellectual
property assets. however, ideas and inventions do not all possess the same value from the
university's perspective. an idea or invention that can be protected by a patent may be of greater
value to the university than one that cannot. this is because a patent enables the university to
exclude others from copying the patented idea or invention. ideas or inventions that are not
patentable may be freely copied by anyone who learns of the idea or invention, unless the
university takes active steps to protect such ideas or inventions as trade secrets.
so that inventions can be properly evaluated, all university personnel who create university
inventions must diligently prepare and maintain invention disclosure documents. an invention
disclosure is a document that provides information about the inventor(s), what was invented, the
circumstances leading to the invention, and facts concerning subsequent activities. it provides the
basis for a determination of patentability and the technical information for drafting a patent
application. an invention disclosure is also used to report technology that may not be patentable
but may be protected by other means such as trade secret and/or copyright laws.

acd-5101 – intellectual property
university of richmond | 5
inventors must prepare and submit on a timely basis an invention disclosure for each potentially
patentable university invention conceived or first actually reduced to practice in whole or in part
in the course of their university responsibilities or with more than incidental use of university
resources.
invention disclosure documents will require the inventor to disclose consulting or other
obligations to any third person, organization or corporation in respect to rights in invention,
which are or could be reasonably construed to be in conflict with obtaining a patent on invention.
additionally, the inventor will agree not to enter into any agreement creating obligations with
respect to invention that is or may be in conflict with obtaining a patent on invention.
there are several basic steps associated with a university invention as follows:
1. the inventor(s) conceives and discloses to the university the university invention. a
disclosure form describing the invention and including other related facts should be
prepared by the inventor and forwarded to the office of foundation, corporate and
government relations. forms may be requested from that office.
2. the university's intellectual property committee (see appendix a) reviews the
university invention and makes a recommendation and/or decision either to seek a patent
using university funds or to not seek a patent.
3. if the university desires to obtain a patent, the inventor, as an employee of the university
of richmond, must sign the inventor verification form confirming: a) the title of the
invention, and b) the name(s) of all individuals that are co-inventors. if the university
decides not to obtain a patent, all rights to the patent revert to the inventor.
4. patent is obtained or steps are put into place to protect the invention as a trade secret.
5. patent, if any, is licensed and royalties are earned.
6. legal enforcement of patent rights begins.
iv. royalty sharing
the office of foundation, corporate and government relations handles the evaluation, marketing,
negotiation, and licensing of university inventions with commercial potential. royalty distribution
is as follows:
a. cash royalties
100% to the university for recovery of costs incurred associated with patent/license
development (e.g., fees for preparing and prosecuting patents in addition to fees associated
with marketing and licensing).
thereafter, income is distributed as follows:
inventor(s) or their heir(s) ____________ 40% of gross royalties
inventor(s)' department _____________ 20% of gross royalties
university_________________________ 40% of gross royalties
b. equity

acd-5101 – intellectual property
university of richmond | 6
the university may at all times agree to accept a negotiated percentage of equity in place or all
of a portion of the license or royalty fee(s).
acd-5101.3 – copyrights
i. background – what is a copyright?
under the copyright act, copyright protection is afforded to any work of authorship fixed in a
tangible medium of expression. copyright protection extends to text, pictures, photographs, visual
arts, architectural works, music and other such works, whether in paper, electronic or other media.
ideas are not protected; copyright law protects only the creative expression embodied within a
particular work. generally, under the "work for hire" doctrine, works of authorship created by
employees within the scope of their employment automatically belong to the employer.
ii. copyright policy
a. non-faculty personnel: where a copyrightable work is developed by non- faculty university
personnel in the course of employment (or, in the case of a student, in conjunction with a
member of the faculty or other university employee) and constitutes a "work for hire" under
u.s. law, the university will own the work.
b. faculty: subject to section c below and in contrast to the general "work for hire" doctrine, the
university recognizes the longstanding academic tradition of allowing faculty members the right
to own their copyrightable works. in such cases, faculty shall be deemed to automatically grant
to the university a non- exclusive, royalty-free perpetual license to materials that are developed
for university courses or curriculum for all traditional, customary or reasonable academic uses of
the material (see section c below for more details). however, the general rule regarding faculty
ownership will be subject to the following exceptions. in each case these items will be owned by
the university, whether developed by faculty or others:
1. computer programs, when the programs are primarily created to perform utilitarian tasks
for the university.
2. databases and similar collections of information which are obtained primarily on behalf
of schools or departments rather than individuals, or which involve issues of privacy (as
in the case of police records or patient records of counseling and psychological
services).
3. works supported by extraordinary allowances, grants or subventions (whether in money
or in money's worth, and whether or not supported by outside sources under contract).
copyright and intellectual property rights in works supported by grantor contracts shall be
governed according to the terms and conditions of such grants or contracts or, in the event such
grants or contracts are silent as to copyrights, such grants or contracts shall be governed by this
policy.
in the case of each exception, the university may, at its option, grant licenses or royalties or both
to the author(s) on such terms as the university considers to be reasonable under the
circumstances.
c. courses of instruction developed by faculty and approved for offering by the university
of richmond, whether or not for credit
1. copyrights arising in courses developed by faculty and approved for offering by the
university ordinarily belong to their individual creators, but rights may vest in the

acd-5101 – intellectual property
university of richmond | 7
university when the course (or some portion of it) falls within the exceptions set forth
above.
2. with respect to each such course (and whether the rights in that course belong to an
individual creator or to the university), the university shall enjoy a permanent non-
exclusive, royalty-free license to make all traditional, customary or reasonable academic
uses of the "immediate content" (defined below) of that course (the "license").
3. the "immediate content" of a course includes both the ideas and the expression arising
extemporaneously as the course is actually taught and delivered to students in the
classroom (or otherwise at an assigned time or place), and this is so even when a
permanent record of the delivery of the course is simultaneously made (e.g., a videotaped
recording of a lecture). to this extent "the immediate content" of the course is subject to
the license.
4. the license shall include a particular right in students duly enrolled in a course to take
class notes for their personal use; but notes in or recordings of a course shall not be taken
or disseminated for commercial purposes unless approved by the instructor.
5. the license also shall include a right in the university to offer the course, or to develop
and offer derivative courses of instruction, in both conventional and non-conventional
settings (including courses intended for use in internet distance education projects),
whether at the university or elsewhere. the license shall continue to be available to the
university even if the faculty member in whom individual rights otherwise vest should
leave the university.
6. this policy recognizes no rights in teaching style or the like, but an individual instructor
may claim personal rights of privacy against non- consensual commercial exploitation of
his or her name, likeness or private personality, depending on the laws of the state in
which enforcement is sought.
d. internet distance education projects
given the increasing presence of digital technologies, and the growing likelihood that distance
education projects via the internet may bring about significant changes in the practices and
fortunes of the faculty, the university desires to establish additional provisions particularly
applicable to such projects:
1. a faculty member who intends to enter into any non-university internet distance
education project in which he or she proposes to teach a course regularly or recurrently,
shall first disclose the proposed undertaking in advance to his or her dean or department
chair (or designee), who will examine the proposed undertaking in order to insure that no
conflict of interest or commitment will arise.
2. conflicts of interest or commitment will be addressed generally in accordance with the
terms of the university policy on conflicts of interest in force from time to time. (see
policy on conflict of interest in external grants policy and procedures manual
).
3. in addition, a conflict of interest or commitment will be presumed to arise under this
policy on copyrights:
(a) when an individual proposes to teach a non-university internet course
substantially equivalent to a conventional course he or she is regularly assigned to
teach at the university;

acd-5101 – intellectual property
university of richmond | 8
(b) when an individual proposes to teach a non-university internet course under
circumstances likely to be directly competitive with an existing or proposed
university internet course, which he or she has been offered an opportunity to
teach; or
(c) when an individual proposes to participate in teaching a non- university internet
course under circumstances likely to confuse or mislead the public with respect to
his or her primary obligations or allegiance as a member of the university faculty.
4. a faculty member who has engaged appropriately in a non-university distance education
project as provided above shall nevertheless repeat the process of notice and clearance
annually thereafter with respect to his or her continuing participation in that project. if
changed circumstances thereafter create a conflict as provided above, and the conflict
cannot reasonably be cleared, the faculty member will withdraw from the project within
one year of the date when the existence of that conflict is determined.
e. additional regulations
the intellectual property committee may develop additional interpretations or regulations
reasonably designed to implement these provisions, and may promulgate additional requirements
with respect to prior notice and clearance. however, the purpose of all such additional
interpretations, regulations or requirements will be to avoid unreasonable conflicts and the
appearance of professional impropriety, rather than to limit unduly an individual's ability to
engage in suitable outside professional activities, including distance education projects; and to
that end, the university will exert reasonable efforts to clear such conflicts and to eliminate any
appearance of impropriety through appropriate disclaimers, licenses or the like.
f. entirely online courses
1. "entirely online course" is a course delivered to students entirely via a computer
network. an entirely online course may comprise course materials including without
limitation lecture notes, course outlines, reading lists, handouts, exercises and
examination questions and answers. an entirely online course may also incorporate
computer programs.
2. compensation for the development, teaching and/or licensing of an entirely online
course will be in accordance with a special agreement with the university. the
developer of an entirely online course who has entered into such an agreement shall
assign to the university all rights, title and interest in this copyrightable work. course
materials as defined above and computer programs, when considered separately from
the entirely online course, are subject to the provisions of the copyright policy.
g. prior works
1. this policy on copyrights shall constitute the sole university policy governing all
copyrights arising in any work of authorship and in any medium in which the work may
be embodied or expressed.
2. copyrights in works created prior to the effective date of this policy shall be treated in
accordance with the principles articulated herein, to the extent that such treatment is
practicable and reasonable.
3. see the following university web pages for additional information on copyrights:
course reserves copyright information

acd-5101 – intellectual property
university of richmond | 9
digital millennium copyright act
regarding the use of technology and information resources
acd-5101.4 – trademarks
i. background – what is a trademark?
a trademark is any word, name, symbol or device used to indicate the source or origin of goods.
similarly, service marks relate to the source of services. trademarks, service marks and the
goodwill that accumulates from their use, constitute valuable assets that symbolize the university
and its reputation.
ii. trademark policy and licensing
the university owns all of the trademarks, service marks, names, nicknames, seals, indicia, logos,
team colors and mascots ("marks") which relate to the university or which members of the public
reasonably believe relate to the university. to insure that the public properly identifies and
associates university marks on products bearing those institution's marks, the university has
established a licensing program. the university has registered some of its marks at the state and/or
federal level. the manager of collegiate licensing, under the umbrella of auxiliary services,
administers the licensing program. the manager of collegiate licensing maintains the official
inventory of university marks, approves and registers any new marks, and maintains a list of
licensees authorized to manufacture and distribute goods bearing the university's marks.
a. goals
the university maintains a licensing program to achieve the following goals:
1. to protect and control the use of the university's marks.
2. to consistently promote the image of the university to the public as well as to the
university community.
3. to establish a cooperative relationship with licensees and to assist in developing a
market for officially licensed products of the university.
4. to provide unrestricted revenues in support of university programs.
b. general guidelines
merchandise of the types described in the product list at the back of this chapter is specifically
covered by this licensing policy where the university's marks are used. the list may be
changed from time to time, and a current version may be obtained from the office of
collegiate licensing.
c. using the university of richmond's marks
all university stores, departments and shops are included in the licensing program. therefore,
all goods described in the product list using the university's marks must be manufactured and
distributed by licensees. the director of auxiliary services maintains a list of licensees, and
only licensed goods can be held for resale. goods covered by the policy and sold on campus
through university stores, departments and shops must be manufactured and distributed by a
licensee.

acd-5101 – intellectual property
university of richmond | 10
the university has entered into a contractual agreement with licensing resource group to
help administer the licensing program on a national basis. licensing resource group acts as
the university's agent to license one or more of the university's marks with the marketing of
various articles of merchandise described in the product list and to conduct special promotions.
any commercial use of university marks in any manner must be approved and governed
through the licensing program.
an advisory committee is comprised of:
1. vice president for business and finance (ex-officio).
2. a representative from advancement/university relations.
3. a representative from the athletic department.
4. a representative from the university bookstore.
5. director of auxiliary services.
6. manager of collegiate licensing.
7. director of business affairs initiatives.
the committee is established to:
1. assist in interpreting university licensing policy.
2. develop program guidelines consistent with the interests of the overall university.
3. review and disapprove or review and recommend to the university branding
committee additions or changes in official university marks as submitted by licensees.
program revenues are to be allocated annually as follows:
1. to apply towards the actual cost of administration in accordance with regular
university budgeting procedures.
2. to help fund the goals of the strategic plan as determined by the provost.
d. guidelines to administer the program
the director of auxiliary services is responsible for administering revisions to the licensing
program guidelines as well as any additions and/or changes to official university indicia.
the services of the licensing resource group include:
1. knowing potential licensees (suppliers and manufacturers).
2. providing licensing information to potential licensees.
3. executing the licensing agreement with licensees.
4. notifying retail outlets about the licensing program and recruiting their vendors.
5. finding potential licensees.
6. attending manufacturers' trade shows.
7. contacting local retailers to get their support.
8. mailing lists of current licensees to retail buyers.

acd-5101 – intellectual property
university of richmond | 11
9. assisting in promotions such as with internal audiences (faculty, staff, students, and
alumni) and the general public; helping with press releases and public presentations.
10. searching for infringers.
11. having "officially licensed product" hang tags placed on licensed goods for sale.
12. insuring timely payments by licensees.
13. conducing on-site audits of licensees.
the director of auxiliary services will propose an annual operating budget for the licensing
activity to the vice president for business and finance. annual operating expenses will be
covered, to the extent possible, from licensing revenues. net revenues (after operating costs)
will be distributed to the goals of the strategic plan as determined by the provost.
any products which carry an approved mark or logo (or any derivation of university of
richmond indicia which would tend to create confusion) will be covered by the licensing
program (see the product list.)
enforcement of the licensing program has two phases:
1. internal – participation by university stores, departments, and stops within the
university community is essential. verifying adherence to the licensing program will
be an essential part of compliance audits conducted by the office of collegiate
licensing and the internal audit department.
2. external – participation by commercial sales outlets will be checked periodically by the
manager of collegiate licensing and licensing resource group as part of the regular
administrative responsibility for the program.
it has been determined by the university that the following products and statements will not
be licensed or allowed:
1. alcoholic beverages.
2. sexually suggestive statements or articles.
3. statements disparaging other schools.
4. sexist, racist, religious products and/or statements, and statements promoting the use of
alcoholic beverages.
5. items of poor quality in relation to the proposed sale price.
6. products bearing the name or likeness otherwise promoting a current university athlete.
7. any item not meeting minimum standards of quality and good taste or having abnormal
product liability possibilities (athletic equipment, food stuffs, products that due to
content are unusually short-lived) as determined by the advisory committee.
licensing fees shall be 7.5 percent of the manufacturer's selling price on items licensed for
retail sales.
product list
category product
1 bags
back packs tote

acd-5101 – intellectual property
university of richmond | 12
category product
beverage (thermos)
carrying & luggage
special purpose
2 bedroom accessories
bedspreads
draperies
sheets
blankets/comforters
3 belt buckles (with or without belt)
4 blankets
stadium/lap
5 button: clothing
lapel (enamel)
6 wall calendars
7 car accessories
emblems
horns
license plate frames
8 floor coverings
carpet
rugs
mat
9 christmas accessories
tree ornaments
decorations
10 timepieces
clocks
watches
11 toiletries
colognes
cosmetics
12 electronic devices
phones
radios
calculators
musical devices
ceiling fans
13 furniture (indoor & outdoor)
chairs
tables
lounges
beds
14 headwear
caps/hats
knitted
formed

acd-5101 – intellectual property
university of richmond | 13
category product
15 helmets (special authorization)
16 illumination devices
lamps
flashlights
candles
matches
lighters
17 wall hangings
picture frames
mirrors
posters
18 beverage containers
glassware
pewter mugs
ceramic mugs
temperature retainer vessels
insulator covers
19 pillows/cushions
20 plastic containers
cups
glasses
bowls
21 playing cards
22 precious metal
charms
necklaces
bracelets
rings
earrings
tie tacks
coins
pewter cups
23 shoes
24 shoe laces
25 soap (assorted)
26 stadium seats
27 stationery products
28 statuary and artwork
29 transfers/decals
30 sunglasses
31 bathroom, kitchen or cooking accessories
towels
aprons
trivets
32 toys, games, stuffed animals
33 umbrellas

acd-5101 – intellectual property
university of richmond | 14
category product
34 wallets and purses
35 wastebaskets/metal trays
36 writing instruments
37 sewing kits and needlepoint
38 wearing apparel
shorts
jackets
infant sets
sleepwear
pants
ties
fleece items
athletic jerseys
warm-ups (non-fleece)
placated collared shirts
non-collared shirts (non-fleece)
39 rainwear
40 knitwear
gloves/mittens
scarves
socks
(see also headwear)
41 novelty
pennants
key chains
42 toilet seats
acd-5101.5 – grievances and amendments
i. grievances
a faculty member aggrieved by the proposed application of any provision of this policy may
appeal to the grievance committee as allowed in chapter 2, section g, item 2 of the faculty
handbook.
a staff member aggrieved by the proposed application of any provision of this policy may use
the grievance procedures on the human resources website
.
a student aggrieved by the proposed application of any provision of this policy may use the
grievance procedures in the student handbook
.
ii. amendments
the president or his/her delegates may amend this policy from time to time, subject to the
obligation to report any substantive changes to the board of trustees through its academic
program committee and business management committee on an annual basis.
acd-5101.6 – appendices

acd-5101 – intellectual property
university of richmond | 15
appendix a
the intellectual property committee shall be composed of nine members, three of whom shall be faculty-
nominated by the university committee on committees and elected by the university faculty with
normal rotating terms. the remaining six shall be the chair of the faculty research committee, the
director of pete, the vice president for information services, the associate vice president and
controller, the executive director of foundation, corporate and government relations and the provost
and vice president for academic affairs. the intellectual property committee chairperson shall be
selected from among the nine members at the initial meeting each year.
the executive director of foundation, corporate and government relations shall work with the vice
president for business and finance in order to administer recommendations of the intellectual property
committee.
the intellectual property committee is responsible for periodic reviews of the intellectual property policy
and consultation regarding intellectual property matters at the university of richmond.
the intellectual property committee shall publish such additional interpretations, regulations and
requirements, and shall take such other administrative actions, as are necessary to the suitable discharge of
its duties and the adequate functioning of this policy, including specific provisions for the further
appointment of its members; but in every case the committee's interpretations, regulations and
requirements, as well as its administrative actions, shall be consistent with the provisions expressed in this
policy.
appendix b
inventor verification form
i understand that, consistent with applicable laws and regulations, the university of richmond (the
"university") is governed in the handling of intellectual property by its official policies published in the
intellectual property policy.
1. i/we am/are the inventor(s) of (insert project title) as described in invention disclosure documents
dated (insert date)
name__________________________________________________________________________
2. i/we have not and will not enter into any agreement creating obligations with respect to my/our
invention(s) that is or may be in conflict with this agreement.
3. this agreement is effective on the date set forth below and is binding on me, my estate, heirs, and
assigns.
signed this ________________ day of __________________, 20____.
signature printed or typed name
title (e.g., professor, admin. asst, etc.) department
social security number
note: original to foundation, corporate and government relations
107 puryear hall, university of richmond, va 23173

acd-5101 – intellectual property
university of richmond | 16
(signer retains a copy)
acd-5101.7 – applicable regulations & accreditation standards
related policies:
n/a
policy background:
adopted by the university's board of trustees on may 10, 2002.
last updated december 13, 2002
policy contacts:
assistant vice president, foundation, corporate, and government relations