university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
this policy addresses the health and safety of university of richmond (ur) students during university
sponsored international travel.
scope:
this policy applies to ur study abroad programs, independent student travel with ur sponsorship, and faculty
or staff-led student programs for enrolled ur students. faculty and staff planning to travel with ur students
abroad should be familiar with these policies.
index:
sec-2011.1 .......policy statement on university sponsorship
sec-2011.2 .......health and safety
sec-2011.3 .......rationale and process for ur's international travel policy
sec-2011.4 .......emergency evacuation
sec-2011.5 .......petitions for student and faculty or staff-led travel
sec-2011.6 .......resources
policy statement:
sec-2011.1 – policy statement on university sponsorship university
this policy applies to university sponsored travel abroad. university sponsorship includes, but is not
limited to: (a) funding provided by or administered through ur; (b) advising for travel through ur, with
or without course credit associated with such travel; (c) travel on ur programs, with or without faculty or
staff leadership; (d) travel on programs sponsored by other universities or entities for which credit will be
policy #: sec-2011 policy title: policy on international travel
effective: 05/11/2021 responsible office: international education
date
approved:
05/10/2021
approval: executive vice president & provost
replaces
policy dated:
04/09/2018 responsible
university official:
dean of international education

sec-2011– international travel policy
university of richmond | 2
requested toward the ur degree; or (d) individual student travel deemed to be under university
sponsorship.
sec-2011.2 – health and safety
ur regularly assesses the health and safety status of each university sponsored program location or
individual student location, especially countries or regions subject to a u.s. department of state (dos)
level 3 or 4 travel advisory or a cdc travel advisory.
for countries or regions bearing a level 3 or 4 dos travel advisory:
• ur's international education assesses safety in countries or regions bearing a dos level 3 or 4 travel
advisory by reviewing various official sources of information including the us department of state
travel advisories, the centers for disease control (cdc) travel advisories, detailed recommendations
of the overseas security advisory council (osac), independent risk management assessments,
resources in each location, including partner organizations, and country-level and regional-level health
and safety advisories. international education then makes a recommendation to ur's travel risk and
safety committee.
• students applying for independent university sponsored travel or faculty wishing to lead a group of
students to countries or regions bearing a level 3 or 4 dos advisory must submit a petition (below)
and may travel only if the petition is approved.
• faculty and staff leaders of student travel must complete the petition linked below, preferably at least
three months prior to anticipated departure to a country or region bearing a level 3 or 4 dos travel
advisory.
countries bearing a lower travel advisory level may still contain regions subject to a level 3 or 4 dos
travel advisory. ur does not permit university sponsored travel to these regions unless a petition has been
approved.
ur will carefully evaluate the safety of ur semester, summer or short-term programs, especially those in
countries or regions with a level 3 or 4 dos travel advisory. students participating in these ur semester,
summer or short-term programs are not required to submit a petition in order to participate.
this policy is in addition to all other ur travel policies. in the event of conflict between ur travel
policies, this policy will prevail.
sec-2011.3 – rationale and process for ur's international travel policy
university-sponsored travel to countries or regions with level 3 or 4 dos travel advisories requires careful
evaluation and assessment of attendant risks and risk mitigation where possible. ur will permit travel to
countries or regions bearing a level 3 or 4 dos travel advisory only after careful review of the specific risks
associated with such country or region, the ability to mitigate such risks, and other factors that ur deems
relevant. approval for such travel will only be granted after a determination by international education and
the travel risk and safety committee that associated risks are reasonable and/or can be mitigated to some
degree, that the student, faculty and staff seeking to travel are aware of the risks, and that the expected
educational benefits of such travel outweigh the risks.
permission for university sponsored travel may be denied at any time and decisions may be reversed if the
political climate, health or security situation deteriorate after initial approval.

sec-2011– international travel policy
university of richmond | 3
sec-2011.4 – emergency evacuation
international education, in conjunction with ur risk management, will work with ur's travel assistance
provider and other resources to coordinate emergency evacuation if this becomes necessary. if the us
department of state issues a mandatory evacuation order, students in the country must contact the nearest
us embassy or consulate to obtain relevant information and guidance, and must leave the country by the
most expeditious and secure means available. students are also required to contact international education
at the earliest opportunity with information about their whereabouts and plans.
if students refuse to comply with an evacuation, ur may withdraw financial support and may institute
disciplinary action. this could result in financial loss, such as a required repayment of financial aid.
if an evacuation is deemed necessary, it may not be possible to recover costs that students have paid
and/or to refund such costs to students for travel as well as the evacuation itself. this is a risk students
assume when traveling. if students are unable to complete the semester abroad, it might not be possible to
receive full or partial credit for work completed abroad, though international education and the office of
the registrar work closely with each student in such cases.
sec-2011.5 – petitions for student travel and faculty or staff-led travel
click here
to download the travel advisory petition.
• individual students should file the petition as soon as their proposed plans have been approved for
funding by the university. students who are considering travel in countries or regions subject to a level
3 or 4 dos travel advisory are encouraged to consult with international education staff early in their
planning process. travel plans should not be finalized until the student has received approval of their
petition in writing.
• faculty and staff organizers of student travel must complete the
online proposal for taking students
outside of the us and, if traveling to a location bearing a level 3 or 4 dos travel advisory, submit a
petition ideally 2-3 months prior to scheduled travel.
student petitions will be reviewed by the travel risk and safety committee comprised of the dean of
international education; director of risk management and insurance; the provost; and university general
counsel. the committee normally reaches a decision within two weeks after submission of a complete
petition. the decision will be communicated by international education.
in addition to the criteria outlined above, the committee will consider, among other factors, the following
when reviewing petitions:
1) the academic justification and faculty support for studying in the travel advisory destination;
2) the student's plan to address specific recommendations, details and guidelines from the us
department of state and other resources as described above, after consultation with international
education;
3) plans for safety and security in response to the specific risks identified by the department of state
and the centers for disease control, and osac, the latter as shared by international education staff;
4) the travel itinerary, lodging and other arrangements at the location;
5) the level of experience, language, and preparation for travel;

sec-2011– international travel policy
university of richmond | 4
6) programmatic or other supports available to the student while at the destination.
students whose petitions are approved will be required to review and sign an agreement and release form
as part of the ur gateway abroad application.
sec-2011.6 – resources
prior to international travel, faculty, staff, and students should become aware of the associated risks of the
places they will visit, as well as the risks of any places through which they will transit en route to their
destination. in addition to consultation with international education staff, we recommend the following
resources:
us department of state
osac
centers for disease control and prevention
australian government travel advice
canadian government travel advice
u.k. government travel advice
world health organization
related policies:
no related policies
policy background:
the previous travel policy dated 04/09/2018 is replaced by this policy.
policy contacts:
director of study abroad