university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
this policy is designed to ensure effective control, security, and management of the university's lock and key
system for the safety and protection of university personnel and equipment.
scope:
the lock and key management policy applies to all lock and key management controls, one cards electronic
key controls, including approval and issuance of access, management of current inventory, and recovery of
access post-separation and position transfers.
index:
sec-2004.1 .......definitions
sec-2004.2 .......policy
sec-2004.3 .......roles and responsibilities
sec-2004.4 .......electronic card access
sec-2004.5 .......hard-key access
sec-2004.6 .......authorizations & approvals
policy statement:
sec-2004.1 – definitions
access – the ability to enter a university space by mean of a traditional metal key or a university of
richmond one card.
policy #: sec-2004 policy title: lock and key management policy and
procedure
effective: 10/01/2019 responsible office: one card office
university facilities
date
approved:
09/29/2019
approval: executive vice president and chief operating
officer
replaces
policy dated:
n/a responsible
university official:
director, environmental operations and
director of business services

sec-2004 – lock and key management policy and procedure
university of richmond | 2
access devices – traditional metal keys, gas keys for vehicle refueling, university one card ids, or any
electronic means of access such as a smartphone.
building master key – any key that provides access to one building.
departmental master key – any key that provides access to a department within a building.
department specific keys – any key that provides access to department specific equipment such as desk
drawers, file cabinets, refrigeration, or other miscellaneous storage containers.
electronic access – allows users to utilize the current one card as a means of access. the door system
(cbord) replaces traditional keys with an electronic door stripe that is configured to allow for remote
communication.
gas key – any key assigned to a department provides access to fuel pump used to refill campus vehicles.
grand master key – any key that provides access to more than one building.
interior access - the electronic access readers are magnetically swiped, and then a personal pin must be
entered on the keypad of the door. also, when students accidentally get locked out of their dorms,
cbord offers the capability to electronically unlock their door as long as they enter their pin.
exterior access - the electronic access readers are strategically placed around the perimeter of the
building. they are magnetically swiped, which then allows access.
one card – the official university of richmond identification card. this card permits access to their
housing and many university services and facilities.
operator key – any key that provides access to a limited number of locks within one building.
outside contractors – companies hired by the university of richmond to provide a service.
sec-2004.2 – policy
the safety and security of the university of richmond's campus is a high priority. the university's open
campus requires policies and procedures that mitigate any risks for its community. lock and key and card
access governance, authorization, inventory management, decommissioning, audits, and monitoring are
included in this policy.
electronic card access
installation of electronic card readers requires contacting one card services and submitting a completed
electronic card access request form (see electronic card access policy sec-2005).
• individuals needing electronic card access must complete the card access request form
online at http://onecard.richmond.edu, which requires approval from the approval authority or the
building coordinator. all areas of the form must be filled out, and the requestor must sign the form
and agree to abide by the responsibilities listed.
• each department requesting and granting electronic card access for individuals will be responsible
for auditing and maintaining records on who has access to their respective area. the master list will
be maintained in the one card office and sent to the respective department for review. a formal
audit must be performed by june 30th annually and must list all access cards in the department's
possession. also, the audit must document whom each card is assigned to or when access was
removed before the audit. a copy of the completed audit must be maintained in the department,

sec-2004 – lock and key management policy and procedure
university of richmond | 3
and a copy must also be sent to the one card office for their annual audit of all access to the cs
gold system.
hard-key access
• key inventory procedures – the key inventory software utilized by the lock shop keeps a
perpetual inventory. if someone requests a key that has previously been issued either to them or
someone else, the application will notify the lock shop that the key is already in use. the lock
shop is notified daily of employment separations of employees who have been issued keys. upon
separation from the university or a transfer to another department, it's the supervisor responsibility
to collect assigned keys and access cards (if applicable) from the employee before their last
working day. keys, gas keys, and id cards are to be returned to the facilities and one card
offices respectively by the third business day after separation has taken place. refer to the hr's
resignation and termination policy for additional information.
• if a key that has been issued by the lock shop is lost or stolen the corresponding door/cylinders
that the key operated will be rekeyed. the key holder, the contractor, authorizing officials or
department may be required to pay for the rekeying if deemed necessary by facilities and urpd.
a key sign out form must be kept by each department which authorizes temporary access on a
daily basis to contractors.
authorizations & approvals
university officials authorized to approve requests for university keys requested from the facilities
department lock shop or electronic access from one card services are listed below:
• coo, provost, associate vice presidents, and assistant vice presidents – all levels.
• administrative officials, deans – grand master and master keys for building (s) in which their
departments are located.
• department entrance and room keys.
• faculty desiring to provide students with access must utilize either the building coordinator,
administrative assistant or their academic unit head to accomplish such authorization.
emergency entry
individuals who do not possess university keys or card access and must gain emergency entry to a
university building or area may request assistance from the university of richmond police department
(urpd). upon the receipt of such request, urpd must verify that the requestor has authorization for
access and secure permission from the appropriate official, if not already handled by prior arrangement,
to allow the requestor to enter the designated area and record the action taken in the daily
communications log.
temporary access
authorizing officials who wish to allow university personnel to enter a university facility under their
authority for an extended period with issuing them a key or card access may notify facilities
(keyrequest@richmond.edu) and one card services (onecard@richmond.edu) of the person's name and
the circumstances of the needed access for further instructions.

sec-2004 – lock and key management policy and procedure
university of richmond | 4
contractors
when access to university facilities is required in connection with a commercially contracted project, the
project manager will coordinate the contractor's requirements with the director of one card services and
director of maintenance services before issuance of keys/cards to contractors by the facilities
department. the project manager will ensure that the contractors understand and agree to their
responsibilities (which are also outlined in the temporary key agreement issued by facilities)). upon
completion of their proof of the need for university keys/cards, the project manager and contractor will
ensure that the keys/cards are returned to the facilities management lock shop and one card services.
sec-2004.3 – roles and responsibilities
the key system is primarily managed by facilities for physical keys and one card services for central
electronic access, with day-to-day management relegated to some individual departments.
responsibilities of approving authorities
• maintain a current listing of personnel to whom they have issued university keys and card access.
• make an accounting of all university keys/cards issued under their authority to ensure proper control
and accountability each year by june 30th. student residence hall keys will be inventoried promptly at
the end of each spring semester, and the end of each summer session and replacement keys will be
ordered immediately.
• notify one card services and the facilities lock shop when employees separate from the university or
transfer to other departments. notify one card services and the facilities lock shop when there is an
office move to another building.
• ensure the return of university keys/cards by individuals at the termination of their employment,
extended leave, or when their duties no longer require the possession of university keys. also, notify
one card services when card access is no longer required for an employee remaining in the
department.
• investigate and report to urpd, facilities department, and one card services of all incidents
involving the loss of university keys. these reports should provide the following data:
o name of the official who authorized the issue of the key(s).
o name of the individual to whom the key(s) were issued.
o type of key(s).
o room(s), building(s), or area(s) to which the key(s) were issued.
o date of the discovery of the key(s) loss or theft and any other pertinent facts. if the key(s) was
lost or stolen outside the jurisdiction of the urpd, a report should be filled with the police in
the jurisdiction where the loss or theft occurred.
responsibility of key/card holders
individuals issued university keys are responsible for their physical security. the loss of a key(s) must be
immediately reported to facilities management. if the said key(s) is lost or stolen off campus, a report must
be filled with the police in the jurisdiction where the loss or theft occurred as well as filing a report with the
urpd when they return to campus. the loss of cards must be reported to one card services and the
facilities lock shop. loaning a key/card to another individual is strictly prohibited.
all master keyrings that are assigned to an individual or department are prohibited from leaving campus.
all rings are to be secured in a controlled lockbox with a designated keeper within the department.

sec-2004 – lock and key management policy and procedure
university of richmond | 5
responsibility of facilities management
the director, environmental operations is responsible for the manufacture/duplication and issuance of all
keys. to maintain a proper university key registry, the facilities lock shop is authorized to conduct annual
audits of key distribution by departments throughout campus. departments not following proper issuance
and maintenance guidelines will be reported to the appropriate administrative authority for corrective action.
the duplication of university keys by any other person or vendor is prohibited by this policy and the laws of
virginia. such duplication, or the possession of a key duplicated with authorization, constitutes a class 3
misdemeanor. the grandmaster and master keys have the "duplication prohibited" etched on the
key. the facilities lock shop will generate and maintain a current listing of all keys
manufactured/duplicated, and the list will document the distribution. approving authorities will use the
facilities management work order system to order keys.
responsibility of one card services
the director of business services has the authority to question, modify and deny access requests. one card
services will coordinate an annual audit of current card access users with approving authorities for
verification. this will be completed annually by june 30th.
departments with key distribution delegation
• police department – responsible for officers and security guards
• student involvement – is responsible for all access to student involvement spaces. student
involvement has the authority to question, modify, and deny access requests. they will maintain their
inventory and key control.
• athletics – is responsible for all access to athletic spaces. athletics has the authority to question,
modify, and deny access requests. they will maintain their inventory and key control.
• residence life & housing – is responsible for all access to the residence halls. housing has the
authority to question, modify, and deny access requests. residence life & housing maintain their
inventory and key control.
• information services – information services has the authority to question, modify, and deny access
requests. they will maintain their inventory and key control.
• recreation & wellness - is responsible for all access to recreation & wellness spaces. recreation &
wellness has the authority to question, modify, and deny access requests. they will maintain their
inventory and key control.
related policies:
sec-2005 electronic card access policy
policy background:
this policy was reviewed by president's cabinet prior to approval on 9/29/2019
policy contacts:
director, environmental operations, university facilities
director of business services, campus services