university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
it is not uncommon for donors to pool together their resources to create a group gift, often in memory or
honor of a particular person or event. this policy is designed to ensure that group gifts are documented and
funds are established in a manner consistent with the university's overarching gift documentation policy and
procedures.
scope:
this policy applies to all group gifts establishing a new fund at the university of richmond.
index:
ext-3004.1 ......definitions
ext-3004.2 ......policy statement
ext-3004.3 ......roles and responsibilities
policy statement:
ext-3004.1 – definitions
gift fund: an institutional fund created when a donor, or multiple donors, give a gift(s) for a specific
purpose(s) as specified in a gift instrument or other written document.
group gifts: gifts intended to establish a new gift fund at the university of richmond through the
combined individual giving of multiple donors.
lead donor: for purposes of this policy, a lead donor is the person(s) determined by the university to enter
into a gift instrument or other written document with the university for a gift fund that has or will have
multiple donors.
memorandum of understanding: for purposes of this policy, a written document signed by an authorized
university official that documents the specific purposes and restrictions of a gift fund only in the event that
the university is unable to identify a lead donor.
policy #: ext-3004
policy title: multiple donor/group gifts policy
effective: 08/19/2022 responsible office: office of advancement
date
approved:
08/19/2022 approval: vice president of advancement
replaces
policy dated:
n/a responsible
university official:
vice president of advancement

ext-3004 – multiple donor/group gifts
university of richmond | 2
gift usage agreement: a legally binding agreement between the university of richmond and one or more
donors in written form. a gift usage agreement will specify any agreed upon restrictions for the usage of a
gift when received, and it will govern the use of an endowed fund created by that gift. the gift usage
agreement should be drafted, reviewed, and signed by appropriate parties before formally accepting gifts.
ext-3004.2 – policy
documentation
 when multiple donors create a new gift fund through a group gift, a lead donor should be
identified by the university of richmond for purposes of creating a gift usage agreement that
documents the specific purposes of the gift fund.
 if no lead donor is identified, the university will create an internal memorandum of understanding
to document the specific restrictions and purposes of the gift fund that best represent the intent of the
donors.
 gift funds with multiple donors must follow all other applicable university policies and procedures.
gift fund creation
 group gifts creating a new gift fund are subject to the same rules of other new pending gift funds. if,
within one (1) year of the specified pledge period, the value of the fund is less than the required
minimum, the funds may either a) be transferred to an existing fund for a related purpose that will
most closely accomplish the donor's intent, or b) create a new gift fund of a different type with a
lower established minimum. this option would require updated gift documentation.
ext-3004.3 –roles and responsibilities
office of advancement:
developing procedures and monitoring compliance related to this policy.
related policies:
memorial/honorary gift funds (in review for updates)
gift acceptance policy (in review for updates)
amendment and restatement of existing gift and gift usage agreements (linked)
gifts establishing endowed scholarship and gifts designated for financial aid (linked)
gift intentions and gift agreements (linked)
policy background:
reviewed by president's cabinet in august 2022 and approved by vp for advancement on aug 19, 2022
policy contacts:
assistant vice president of development
director of donor relations and stewardship
director of advancement operations