university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right
to elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
index:
irm-3001.1 .......purpose
irm-3001.2 .......definitions
irm-3001.3 .......policy statement
irm-3001.4……applicable regulations and accreditation standards
policy statement:
irm-3001.1 – purpose
the university of richmond provides network connectivity to faculty, staff, students, and visitors to facilitate
the educational mission of the institution. network connectivity can take the form of a wired connection, wi-
fi connection, or remote access connection via the campus vpn.
devices that connect to the campus network must satisfy minimum network security requirements to protect
the integrity of shared data, systems, and operations. devices that cannot be meet these requirements may be
permitted to connect to the restricted network. a visitor network is provided for anonymous wi-fi access
for those not affiliated with the university.
policy #: irm-3001 policy title: network device connectivity policy
effective: 07/01/2021 responsible office: information services
date
approved:
06/29/2021
approval: vice president for information services & chief
information officer
replaces
policy dated:
11/18/2016 responsible
university official:
vice president for information services & chief
information officer

irm-3001– network device connectivity policy
university of richmond | 2
irm-3001.2 – definitions
university networks
campus network
the campus network is the primary point of access for faculty, staff, and students to the university's
computing resources, systems, and data.
restricted network
university assets that do not meet the minimum network security requirements may be connected to the
restricted network. the restricted network is comprised of devices that would normally pose a
vulnerability to other users, data, and applications. the restricted network allows aging technology to
continue to run on a short-term basis, until it is upgraded or replaced, by restricting the ability of devices
to connect to services on the campus network.
visitor network
the university provides an anonymous and unencrypted wi-fi network for visitors. there may be some
restrictions regarding access to university and internet resources on the visitor network.
classification of networked devices
workstations
workstations are general use devices that run microsoft windows, macos, or linux operating systems.
servers
servers are devices that provide shared resources such as file shares, printers, or an application to one or
more users over the network. with very few exceptions, they can be found in the campus data center.
smart devices
a smart device is typically a general-purpose computing device that has multiple functions, but unlike a
traditional desktop or laptop, it is usually much smaller and more mobile.
embedded devices
an embedded device generally contains a special-purpose operating system. the device is typically
dedicated to a small set of tasks and is usually "headless" meaning there is no person directly operating the
device.

irm-3001– network device connectivity policy
university of richmond | 3
irm-3001.3 – policy
all networks (campus, restricted, and visitor) must be comprised of switches, wi-fi access points, and
vpn devices that have been configured and deployed by network services. no third party or
departmental network access equipment is permitted.
in all cases, users of university networks (campus, restricted, and visitor) are always required to adhere
to the requirements of the acceptable use policy (https://is.richmond.edu/policies/acceptable-use.html), as
well as those policies outlined at http://is.richmond.edu/policies/index.html.
campus network
the campus network is designed with logical and physical segmentation. technical controls are applied
to groups of users and systems to ensure data confidentiality, integrity, and availability. security controls
are placed on many shared access segments to mitigate the spread of malicious traffic. the campus
network requires some form of authentication. anonymous access is permitted only on the visitor
network.
it is important that the requirements in the accompanying network device connectivity standard
are
evaluated prior to the purchase of any network connected device. in order to protect the integrity of the
campus network and the connected users, systems, data and devices, network services reserves the right
to remove any device from the campus network that does not meet the requirements or to move it to the
restricted network.
network connected devices are divided into classes, based on the definitions in this policy. these devices
must meet the network security requirements enumerated in the network device connectivity standard
.
restricted network
the following categories of workstations and servers must use the restricted network:
• systems with obsolete operating systems or hardware for which patches for security vulnerabilities
are no longer available from the manufacturer or vendor
• systems that are not actively managed to install manufacturer-provided security patches in a timely
manner
• systems attached to obsolete equipment that preclude the patching of the system.
users recognize that the devices on the restricted network are there because the devices represent a risk
to the campus network. note that these devices also represent a risk to other devices in the restricted
network. any unusual activity or disruptions should be reported to the help desk.
restrictions for devices on the restricted network are documented in the
network device connectivity
standard.

irm-3001– network device connectivity policy
university of richmond | 4
visitor network
faculty, staff, and students should not connect devices to the visitor network. visitor devices include any
workstation or smart device brought to campus by a visitor of the university. visitors are not permitted to
connect servers or embedded devices to the visitor network. connectivity to the visitor network does not
require authentication.
restrictions for devices on the visitor network are documented in the accompanying
network device
connectivity standard.
irm-3001.4 – applicable regulations and accreditation standards
sacscoc principles of accreditation 10.6 (distance and correspondence education)
red flags rule of the fair and accurate credit transaction act of 2003 (fact act), public law 108-
159, section 114
family educational rights and privacy act (ferpa) (20 u.s.c. § 1232g; 34 cfr part 99)
general data protection regulation (gdpr) (eu) 2016/679f. gramm–leach–bliley act (glba), also
known as the financial services modernization act of 1999, public law 106–102, 113 stat. 1338
health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 (hipaa), public law 104-191
payment card industry data security standard (pci dss)
sacscoc principles of accreditation 12.5 (student records)
related policies:
irm-4003 information security policy
irm-2001 acceptable use policy
policy background:
policy created on november 18, 2016
revisions to policy reviewed by president's cabinet on 06/28/2021 and approved by vp & cio on
06/29/2021
policy contacts:
vice president for information services & chief information officer
assistant vice president for systems & networks