university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
this policy is designed to foster the university of richmond's commitment to compliance with applicable laws
and regulations governing the university and its operations by ensuring that members of the university
community who, in good faith, raise a concern regarding an actual or potential compliance issue are not subject
to any form of retaliation.
scope:
this policy applies to the universit y of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right to
elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
index:
gov-1004.1......policy
policy statement:
gov-1004.1 – policy
all members of the university community, including faculty, staff and students, who have a good faith
concern regarding compliance with applicable laws and regulations or university policies are expected to
report such concerns to their direct supervisor, their dean, or the university general counsel.
the university prohibits retaliation or retribution, in any form, against an individual who reports, in good
faith, an actual, potential or suspected issue regarding compliance with applicable laws or regulations or
university policies. as used in this policy, reporting "in good faith" means the individual making the report
policy #: gov-1004 policy title: policy prohibiting retaliation
effective: june 16, 2011 responsible office: president's office
date
approved:
june 16, 2011
approval: board of trustees
replaces
policy dated:
june 9, 2009 responsible
university official:
vice president and general counsel

gov-1004 – policy prohibiting retaliation
university of richmond | 2
has a reasonable basis to believe that there has been or may have been a violation of applicable laws or
regulations or university policies or that there is a reasonable possibility that such a violation may occur in
the near future. individuals who make frivolous or false reports shall not be deemed to be acting in good
faith.
anyone who engages in or attempts to engage in retaliation or retribution against an individual who reports, in
good faith, an actual, potential or suspected issue regarding compliance with applicable laws or regulations or
university policies shall be subject to discipline in accordance with the policies and procedures of the
university.
related policies:
the university of richmond code of organizational ethics and integrity
policy background:
this policy was reviewed and approved by the university of richmond board of trustees in june 2011.
this policy was reviewed by the university's vice president and general counsel in june 2018.
policy contacts:
vice president & general counsel
director of compliance and title ix coordinator