university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
the purpose of this policy is to ensure that university office space is used as effectively as possible to
advance the university mission and strategic priorities.
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right
to elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
index:
prm-1003.1 ......policy statement
policy statement:
prm-1003.1 – policy
space is a vital university resource, and office space, like other space at the university is allocated centrally.
to ensure the most effective use of space and effective emergency communications, office assignments are
maintained centrally. all office assignments or reassignments must be approved by the university space
manager. in accordance with the policy on space allocation and facilities resources, an approved office
assignment must be secured and university facilities must be notified before a staff position is posted or
faculty search is begun.
policy #: prm-1003
policy title: office assignment policy
effective: 04/15/2024 responsible office: campus operations
date
approved:
04/08/2024 approval: executive vice president and chief operating
officer
replaces
policy dated:
n/a responsible
university official:
senior associate vice president for campus
operations

prm-2002 – office assignment policy
university of richmond | 2
faculty office and research space assignments
tenured, tenure-track, and continuing faculty can typically expect to be assigned an office within their home
department. faculty will be assigned only one office, even when they hold a joint appointment with another
department or program or when they are serving as department chair. faculty on sabbatical or leave who will
not be utilizing their office during that semester or year may occasionally be expected to allow a visiting
faculty member to use their assigned office during the period of their leave from the university. full-time
visiting faculty may be assigned a shared office, depending on space availability. adjunct faculty typically
will not be assigned an individual office, though they will be provided space that is appropriate for office
hours and other teaching needs. unpaid appointments, including courtesy appointments, retired faculty, and
emeritus faculty, will not be provided office space.
members of the tenured or tenure-track faculty who are serving in full-time administrative leadership
positions (e.g., associate dean, associate provost) can expect to have an office or workspace assigned to
them in their administrative leadership office in addition to maintaining their existing department office. such
administrative offices will be suitable for the work, and shared, open, or less proximate space may be assigned
if the administrative office will not be in regular daily use.
some faculty will need assignment of or access to specialized space (e.g., laboratory, studio) in order to
perform their research or creative work. in such instances, the dean is responsible for submitting a project
request as part of the annual facilities project plan development process. in addition, the dean is responsible
for collaborating with university facilities to ensure the longest possible planning horizon for the
identification and development of the necessary research space. (see policy on space allocation and
facilities resources)
promises of specific space or space rental may not be made as part of any faculty or staff appointments
without written approval from the sa vp for campus operations or the evp/chief operating officer.
staff office assignments
assignment of staff work spaces will be aligned with the nature of the work; not all staff will have individual
offices or work stations. staff whose job responsibilities include welcoming visitors or serving as a first point
of contact will typically not be assigned an individual office. space allocation will be aligned with flexible
work arrangements; office-sharing and other kinds of arrangements will be implemented to maximize the use
of space among staff who regularly work remotely. student employees will not be assigned individual offices.
vacating office space
supervisors (in the case of staff departures) and deans' offices (faculty departures) are responsible for
notifying university facilities (the university space manager) as soon as a department is aware that an office
will become vacant, so that a determination can be made about the need for any maintenance and appropriate
scheduling of the planned maintenance.

prm-2002 – office assignment policy
university of richmond | 3
full-time tenured, tenure-track and continuing faculty who retire or depart from the university will be
expected to vacate their offices no later than june 15 (when service ends in may) or february 1 (when service
ends in december).
staff who retire or depart from the university as well as all visiting and adjunct faculty are expected to vacate
their offices or workspaces at the conclusion of their last day of service at the university.
personal books, paperwork, or other belongings left behind after an employee departs will be discarded.
office space for new hires / new positions
as part of the request for permission to replace a vacated position or create a new (incremental) position, the
vice president or dean will identify a proposed office assignment for the new hire – or indicate that no known
office space is available. in accordance with the policy on space allocation and facilities resources, the
university space manager will confirm the availability of office space or indicate that no known office space
exists. an office assignment must be confirmed before a position can be posted or a search can begin. when
a new or replacement position is approved without a permanent office having been identified, facilities must
confirm a temporary office before a search can begin. in such instances, staff members may be assigned a
shared office space while the necessary project is planned and executed to make space available.
it is the responsibility of the hiring vice president or dean to submit a project request to university facilities
by the annual deadline for any office upgrade or specialty research space needs that will be associated with a
hire.
reassignment of office space
when a space is vacated, particularly non-standard faculty offices, it may be appropriate for the vacated office
to be occupied by an existing employee, rather than the department's next new hire. in those instances, the
resulting space reassignments must be developed in collaboration with university facilities and approved by
the university space manager. typically, such approval should be sought at the same time approval is sought
to hire the replacement staff or faculty member; in situations in which the vacancy will not be filled, the office
space reassignment must be approved by the university space manager before it is announced or the timeline
for moves established. university facilities and information services must be notified of the need for moving
assistance at least 12 weeks prior to a planned move date. reassignment of a current employee into a vacated
office should typically be limited to one move (i.e., employees within an entire department should not all
move to different offices because of one vacancy). more complex reassignment / reorganization of office
space within a unit must be requested as part of the annual facilities project plan process.
office fixtures and furnishings
standard office upgrades (paint, flooring, carpet, furniture) for approved new staff and faculty hires will be
made at the discretion of university facilities and funded by university facilities. such office upgrades will
ordinarily be completed only if they are on-cycle for the building, or part of the typical upgrade for a new
faculty member. office upgrades are typically not provided in the case of office reassignments. vice
presidents and deans may request office upgrades as part of the annual facilities project plan development
each year, in accordance with the policy on space allocation and facilities resources.

prm-2002 – office assignment policy
university of richmond | 4
specialized furniture requests will generally not be accommodated unless necessary for a disability
accommodation or faculty member's teaching or research.
furniture design is generally specific to a building. offices must utilize university-issued furniture;
individuals may not add private furniture to their assigned offices. furniture is assigned to an office, not an
individual. if an individual moves to a different office, the furniture will remain in the space to which it was
assigned.
related policies:
policy on space allocation and facilities resources
resignation and separation policy
university facilities access policy
lock and key management policy
classroom scheduling policy
policy background:
policy was codified in 2024 based on existing university practices. president's cabinet and academic deans
reviewed prior to approval on 04/08/2024.
policy contacts:
senior associate vice president for campus operations
assistant director of campus planning