university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
the purpose of this policy is to provide guidelines for students, faculty, and staff to engage in safe use of
university of richmond-owned grills on campus.
scope:
the scope of this policy applies to any student, faculty, or staff member that wishes to utilize one of the
university-owned grills in designated campus locations. this policy does not apply to grill use during
tailgating events.
index:
prm-1007.1 ......definitions
prm-1007.2 ...... policy statement
prm-1007.3 ...... roles & responsibilities
policy statement:
prm-1007.1 – definitions
charcoal grill: a type of grill that uses charcoal as fuel to cook food. charcoal grills are typically kettle- or
barrel-shaped, but can also be pellet grills, chimney starters, or kamado grills.
propane grill: an outdoor cooking appliance that uses liquid propane (lp) as a heat source to grill food.
sponsoring group: the university department or unit, recognized student organization, or external
organization or individual that is scheduling, directly overseeing, and paying for an event.
policy #: prm-1007
policy title: outdoor grill use policy
effective: 02/15/2025 responsible office: events, conferences & support services
date
approved:
02/08/2025 approval: executive vice president and chief operating
officer
replaces
policy dated:
n/a responsible
university official:
director of events, conferences & support
services

prm-1007 – outdoor grill use policy
university of richmond | 2
prm-1007.2 – policy
university-owned grills are provided and permitted for use only at the following designated locations. all
other locations (including the university forum) are prohibited from grill use with the exception of grill use in
tailgating events (see prm-1008 – university tailgating policy).
• intramural field picnic area – charcoal grill (reservable)
• the cave: student organization lodge – propane grill (reservable)
• fraternity lodge area – propane grills (for chapter use, non-reservable)
• residential areas near university forest apartments (for individual use, non-reservable)
with the exception of tailgating locations, individuals may not bring or utilize any type of grill on campus
except those provided by the university in designated locations. unauthorized grills may be confiscated if
found to be used and/or stored on campus property. violation of this policy is subject to fines and disciplinary
action in accordance with the student handbook.
registered student organizations, other campus units, or individuals who wish to use a university-owned
grill for an event or gathering must request and receive approval from the center for student involvement,
and events, conferences & support services. space requests must be approved in ems (event management
system) prior to their use.
use requirements
all grills and propane tanks (full and empty) must remain outdoors and stationary at each of their designated
locations.
grills are located on non-combustible surfaces and secured to their locations. never attempt to move or
relocate a grill.
grills must not be within ten feet of any structure and/or combustible materials, including near egress points.
combustible debris within a ten-foot radius from the grill, in all directions, must be removed to reduce the
risk of fire.
grill users must read and follow safety guidelines for grill use, care, and maintenance provided with approval
and/or onsite.
grills must be always attended to by the authorized individual. leaving a grill unattended will be subject to a
citation and grill users may be asked to cancel their activity immediately by events or csi staff, or urpd.
authorized grill users must immediately report any malfunctions of propane grills and stop using the
equipment immediately.
waste disposal
charcoal (hot or cold) must be disposed of properly in a non-flammable metal container. appropriate
containers can be requested from landscaping through events, conferences & support services when making
a space reservation request.

prm-1007 – outdoor grill use policy
university of richmond | 3
cleaning of the grill is mandatory.
ensure all trash is picked up and disposed of properly, any grease residue is cleaned, and waste/leftover food
is disposed of properly to avoid bugs or rodents.
prm-1007.3 –roles and responsibilities
grill users: responsible for safe use of the grill, safe food handling, and following this and all other
applicable policies. grill users must report malfunctions to the center for student involvement.
center for student involvement: responsible for regularly inspecting, servicing and maintaining the grill, the
housing unit, and the fuel storage for grills at the cave and the fraternity lodges.
office of environmental health & safety: responsible for regularly inspecting, servicing and maintaining the
grill.
events, conferences & support services: responsible for providing the proper documentation with the event
confirmation to sponsoring groups when reservations are approved and confirmed.
related policies:
prm-4001 - policy for events with alcohol on campus
prm-1005 - university events and space reservations policy
prm-1008 – university tailgating policy
university of richmond housing fire safety policy
policy background:
original policy reviewed by president's cabinet in 2025 before being included in the university policy
library.
non-substantive revisions made to update departments and titles on 12/03/2025
policy contacts:
director of events, conferences & support services