university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
in recognition of the university's commitment to the welfare of its employees and their families, this parental
leave policy provides paid time off for eligible staff and faculty who temporarily take leave for the opportunity
to care for and bond with a new child following childbirth, adoption, or state placement of a foster child in their
home.
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right
to elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
policy statement:
as outlined in this policy, the university of richmond provides parental leave to employees to care for and
bond with a newborn, newly adopted, or newly placed foster child within 12 months of the birth, adoption, or
state placement of a child; or when required to fulfill the legal requirements for an adoption.
parental leave does not apply to situations in which there has been a change in status of legal custody that is not
also accompanied by an adoption, birth, or foster placement.
policy #: hrm-2011
policy title: parental leave policy
effective: 01/01/2025 responsible office: human resources
date
approved:
11/12/2024 approval: university president
replaces
policy dated:
july 12, 2024 responsible
university official:
chief human resources officer

hrm-2011– parental leave policy
university of richmond | 2
eligibility
eligible staff and faculty include the mother, father, adoptive parent, or foster parent following the birth,
adoption, or new placement of a foster child.
eligible staff:
full-time benefit-eligible staff that have at least one calendar year of full-time service
eligible faculty:
o tenured faculty
o tenure track faculty, who have greater than one (1) academic year of service at the university
o faculty on fixed-term appointments of two or more years, who have greater than one (1)
academic year of service at the university; and
o faculty on continuing appointments, including teaching faculty and clinical faculty, who have
greater than one (1) academic year of service at the university
duration of parental leave
staff
• parental leave provides eight-weeks (40 workdays - based on a regularly scheduled workweek limited to
up to 8 hours per day) of paid leave within twelve (12) months of the birth, adoption, or state placement
of a child. the leave must be used in one span of time.
• birth mothers will apply for both short term disability (std) and family medical leave (fmla).
short term disability and family medical leave (fmla) will run concurrently. parental leave will normally
begin immediately following any short-term disability due to birth (std typically 6-8 weeks) unless the
employee is not eligible for parental leave at the time of birth. in such case the employee would take
parental leave once eligible, but within twelve (12) months of the birth, adoption, or state placement of a
child.
• leave would be used in the following order for birth mothers:
o available sick/vacation leave must be used during std elimination period (14 days – usually 10
workdays)
o if std is approved, employees may choose to use sick leave and vacation while on std to
continue pay at 100%, otherwise, std will pay at 66 2/3%.
once std ends birth mothers may take parental leave immediately or at a later point but must
take parental leave within twelve (12) months of the birth, and the parental leave must be used in
one span of time.
• parental leave is inclusive of all university holidays.
faculty
• faculty may receive one (1) full fall or spring semester of paid leave within twelve (12) months of the
birth, adoption, or state placement of a child.
• birth mothers:
o apply for short term disability (std) & family medical leave (fml) at the time of birth.
short term disability and family medical leave (fmla) will run concurrently. the request for
parental leave will typically be for the dates of the semester following the birth.

hrm-2011– parental leave policy
university of richmond | 3
if parental leave is requested in the semester of the anticipated birth, the birth mother will still apply for std
and fmla upon birth and the parental leave will run concurrently with std and fmla.
n
otice
• staff and faculty should provide the university with advance written notice of the intent to take parental
leave as soon as practicable.
a
dditional information
• if both parents are eligible university employees, they will each receive the maximum paid parental
leave for a staff and/or faculty member. they do not have to share the time.
• one paid parental leave benefit is available per employee, per birth, adoption, or placement event. the
number of children involved does not increase the length of paid parental leave granted for that event.
• while on parental leave, the staff or faculty may not work secondary jobs at the university
• while on paid parental leave, staff continue to accrue sick and vacation time
f
or all staff and faculty, parental leave runs concurrently with leave afforded by the family medical leave act
(fmla). if the amount of fmla leave available is less than the amount of paid parental leave, paid parental
leave will be granted as specified in this policy.
• b
irth mothers must apply for fmla and short-term disability
• mothers who are adopting or fostering must file for fmla
• fathers must file for fmla
for instructions on how to apply please see the human resources website.
r
eturn to work
an employee shall notify the university in writing, as soon as reasonably possible, if they will not be returning
from leave as planned.
m
edical insurance continuation
employee benefits will continue while on paid parental leave. if the employee fails to return at the end of the
approved period of leave, then they may be liable to the university for the employer's share of the benefit
premiums that the university paid during the approved period of leave.
policy background
policy for staff and faculty combined and updated effective january 1, 2025. policy was reviewed by
president's cabinet and academic cabinet prior to approval on november 12, 2024.
staff parental leave policy:
established july 1, 2009 following review by president's cabinet and deans.
updated september 9, 2016
revised in january 2019 following review by president's cabinet and deans
non-substantive revisions february 13, 2023
revised july 12, 2024, following review by president's cabinet and deans
non-substantive revisions for clarification on october 23, 2025

hrm-2011– parental leave policy
university of richmond | 4
faculty parental leave policy:
established july 1, 2009 following review y president's cabinet and deans
policy updated february 13, 2013
non-substantive changes february 13 and december 3, 2023
revised july 12, 2024, following review by president's cabinet and deans
policy contacts:
chief human resources officer