university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all space owned or leased by the university, including
both indoor and outdoor locations.
index:
prm-3002.1 ......definitions
prm-3002.2 ......policy
policy statement:
prm-3002.1 – definitions
sponsoring group: the university department, unit, or registered student organization or external
organization or individual that is scheduling, directly overseeing, and paying for an event.
university-sponsored events: those activities directly related to the life of the campus community
including academic, cultural, social, recreational and student programming activities, intercollegiate athletic
events, events for prospective students, and alumni events hosted by or in collaboration with
advancement. university-sponsored events must be scheduled, sponsored, and directly overseen by faculty,
staff, administrative offices, or registered student organizations. academic conferences sponsored by the
university and athletic camps sponsored by university athletics or its coaches are considered university-
sponsored events.
policy #: prm-3002 policy title: photography and videography policy
effective: 03/27/2025 responsible office: office of university communications
date
approved:
03/27/2025 approval: vice president for university communications
and chief marketing officer
replaces
policy dated:
n/a responsible
university official:
vp university communications and chief
marketing officer

prm-3002 – photography and videography policy
university of richmond | 2
university co-sponsored events: programs, conferences, camps, workshops, resource development
activities and/or meetings involving two entities: (1) a university division, school, academic department,
administrative unit, or registered student organization and (2) an external organization. co-sponsored events
must advance the university's mission; provide benefit to students, staff, and/or faculty as attendees; and the
university co-sponsor must be directly involved in scheduling, organizing, overseeing, and participating in
the event.
non-university external events: programs and activities sponsored by individuals, organizations or groups
not part of the organizational structure of the university who request to use university facilities for the benefit
of their own programs or organizations. examples of non-university external events include weddings,
fundraising events that do not benefit the university, and other types of meetings and events sponsored by
business, government, individuals and non-profit organizations. events sponsored by university employees
that do not have a university-related business purpose are considered non-university external events (e.g.,
private parties or meetings of organizations to which employees belong that do not have a direct business
purpose for the university).
prm-3002.2 – policy
photography and videography may not interfere with the educational or administrative functions of the
university nor disrupt any events on campus.
when taking photographs or video on campus, special care should be taken in cannon memorial chapel, the
wilton center, and the columbarium and memorial garden to avoid intrusion, disruption or disrespect.
sponsoring groups hosting events and activities with photography and videography should refer to the
university communications photography and video resources
.
phot
ography for university uses
when photographing or filming non-students 18 years or younger as part of a university-sponsored event or
for a university business purpose, a release from the child's parents or guardian is required. the sponsoring
university office must keep the release on file.
university offices and sponsoring groups should make university communications aware if they hire an
external vendor to photograph or film an event.
members of the media and non-university events
permission must be obtained from university communications for all photo and/or video shoots on the
university of richmond campus by members of the media.
university of richmond branding, logos, trade or service marks are not allowed to be photographed/filmed for
use in advertisements or other commercial purposes without the university's prior written approval. this
includes, but is not limited to, the university of richmond name, ur shield, the word "spiders," and the
spider and web logos.
requests to conduct professional photo or video shoots on campus for non-university purposes or as part of a
non-university external event (including for commercial purposes) must be directed to events and support
services. the events team will consult with university communications about the scope of the project. the
use of university space for such photo or video shoots may be limited at the discretion of university
communications.

prm-3002 – photography and videography policy
university of richmond | 3
related policies:
prm 1002 - university events and space reservations policy
prm 3001 – use of university marks on merchandise
policy background:
policy reviewed by president's cabinet on 3/24/2025 and approved on 3/27/2025.
policy contacts:
vp for communications and chief marketing officer
director of events and support services