university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
the university of richmond expects adherence to the highest ethical and moral standards in the conduct of
research and scholarly activity. students, faculty and staff members are individually responsible for adhering
to applicable laws and regulations, ethical standards of their respective professions (such as professional
codes of conduct), and university policies. the university of richmond supports individuals in their efforts
to adhere to ethical and moral standards through the articulation of this policy, the availability of training
resources, and the promise that the university will not tolerate retaliation against anyone who, in good faith,
raises concerns about research conducted at the university or those who participate in the processes set forth
in this policy. (see the policy prohibiting retaliation
.)
while this university of richmond policy is based on a sample policy promulgated by the u.s office of
research integrity, it applies to all allegations of research misconduct, not just those related to federally
funded research. this policy describes procedures for dealing with allegations of research misconduct while
providing fair process for the subjects of such allegations or complaints. it applies to all university of
richmond faculty, administrators, staff, or students who seek support for or conduct research.
scope:
this statement of policy applies to all research conducted at or under the auspices of the university of
richmond by faculty, staff or students engaged in research. it also applies to any person who was employed
by, was an agent of, or was affiliated by contract or agreement with the university. this document relates to
allegations of research misconduct (fabrication, falsification, or plagiarism in proposing, performing, or
reviewing research, or in reporting research results).
this policy does not apply to authorship or collaboration disputes and applies only to allegations of research
misconduct that occurred within six years of the date the university received the allegation.
index:
acd-5202.1 ......definitions
acd-5202.2 ......policy statement
acd-5202.3 ......rights & responsibilities
policy #: acd-5202
policy title: policy for responding to allegations of
research misconduct
effective: 01/31/2011 responsible office: compliance office
date
approved:
01/31/2011 approval: executive vice president & provost
replaces
policy dated:
12/08/2009
responsible
university official:
director of compliance and title ix coordinator

acd-5202– policy for responding to allegations of research misconduct
university of richmond | 2
acd-5202.4 ......general policies and principles
acd-5202.5 ......conducting the assessment and inquiry
acd-5202.6 ......the inquiry report
acd-5202.7 ......conducting the investigation
acd-5202.8 ......the investigation report
acd-5202.9 ......completion of cases; reporting premature closures to ori
acd-5202.10 ....university administrative actions
acd-5202.11 ....other considerations
acd-5202.12 ....applicable regulations & accreditation standards
acd-5202.13 ....appendix a – research integrity officer responsibilities
acd-5202.13 ....appendix b – summary of ur research misconduct reporting steps (flow chart)
policy statement:
acd-5202.1 – definitions
terms used have the same meaning as given them in the public health service policies on research
misconduct 42 cfr part 93 (subpart b), which is used by the u.s. office of research integrity (oir) in its
model policy, on which this university of richmond policy is based.
complainant means a person who in good faith makes an allegation of research misconduct.
deciding official (do) means the university of richmond evp & provost or his/her designee, who makes
final determinations on allegations of research misconduct and any resultant university administrative
actions. the deciding official will not be the same individual as the research integrity officer and should
have no direct prior involvement in the university's inquiry, investigation, or allegation assessment. a do's
appointment of an individual to assess allegations of research misconduct, or to serve on an inquiry or
investigation committee, is not considered to be direct prior involvement.
research misconduct means "fabrication, falsification, or plagiarism in proposing, performing, or reviewing
research or in reporting research results. fabrication is making up data or results and recording or reporting
them. falsification is manipulating research materials, equipment, or processes, or changing or omitting data
or results such that the research is not accurately represented in the research record. plagiarism is the
appropriation of another person's ideas, processes, results, or words without giving appropriate credit.
research misconduct does not include honest error or differences of opinion." 42 cfr part 93.103
research integrity officer (rio) means the university official responsible for: (1) assessing allegations of
research misconduct to determine if they fall within the definition of research misconduct, are covered by 42
cfr part 93, and warrant an inquiry on the basis that the allegation is sufficiently credible and specific so
that potential evidence of research misconduct may be identified; (2) overseeing inquiries and investigations;
and (3) the other responsibilities described in this policy. the director of compliance and title ix
coordinator has been designated the research integrity officer. in the event of his or her unavailability, the
provost shall designate an appropriate alternate.
respondent means the person named in an allegation of research misconduct. other terms are defined in 42
cfr part 93 (subpart b).
other terms are defined in 42 cfr part 93 (subpart b).

acd-5202– policy for responding to allegations of research misconduct
university of richmond | 3
acd-5202.2 – policy
this university of richmond policy for responding to allegations of research misconduct is adapted from the
u.s. office of research integrity's sample policy. for ease of use this policy does not "quote" the extensive
use of this sample material; nor does it include frequent references to the public health service, which
originally promulgated the policy on which the model policy was based. this policy replaces the previous
research misconduct policy of the university of richmond, effective january 31, 2011.
under this policy, the executive vice president & provost will serve as or designate the "deciding official"
for allegations of research misconduct. the provost will also designate the research integrity officer (rio),
who also serves as the university director of compliance and title ix coordinator.
when a member of the university community has reason to believe that research misconduct has occurred, he
or she is obligated to report such concerns to the rio. a potential complainant may also seek guidance from
the rio as to whether or not such concerns warrant a complaint. upon receipt of a complaint, the rio will
assess allegations and determine whether or not an inquiry will be conducted. the process can end at this time
with a determination by the rio that an inquiry is not warranted.
if an inquiry is warranted, an inquiry committee will be appointed by the rio, in consultation with other
university officials. the inquiry committee will interview the complainant, the respondent (the subject of the
complaint), and other key witnesses, as well as review relevant evidence. a draft inquiry report will be
provided to the respondent for comment. the inquiry committee will decide, in consultation with the rio, if
an investigation is recommended and report its findings to the deciding official. the deciding official will
determine in writing whether or not an investigation is warranted. if an investigation is warranted, an
investigation committee is formed. the rio will provide the u.s. office of research integrity (oir) with the
deciding official's written decision and the final inquiry report.
the purpose of the investigation is to develop a factual, detailed record of the allegations and evidence and
make a recommendation to the deciding official. members of the inquiry committee may subsequently serve
on the investigation committee. after a thorough review, the investigation committee and the rio will
prepare a draft report, which will be made available to the respondent for comment. after the investigating
committee makes its final report, the deciding official will make a final decision in writing as to whether or
not the university accepts the investigation report, its findings, and its recommended actions. the rio will
notify the complainant and the respondent of this decision and provide required materials to the u.s. oir.
the deciding official will ensure that appropriate administrative actions are taken. records will be retained
for seven years.
acd-5202.3 –rights and responsibilities
a. research integrity officer (rio)
the provost will appoint the rio who will have primary responsibility for implementation of the university's
policies and procedures on research misconduct. a detailed listing of the responsibilities of the rio is set
forth in appendix a section acd-5202.13. these responsibilities include the following duties related to
research misconduct proceedings:
• consult confidentially with persons uncertain about whether to submit an allegation of research
misconduct;
• receive allegations of research misconduct;

acd-5202– policy for responding to allegations of research misconduct
university of richmond | 4
• assess each allegation of research misconduct in accordance with section 5, a. (conducting the
assessment and inquiry) of this policy to determine whether it falls within the definition of research
misconduct and warrants an inquiry;
• as necessary, take interim action and notify the office of research integrity (ori) of special
circumstances, in accordance with section 4, f. (general policies and principles). of this policy;
• sequester research data and evidence pertinent to the allegation of research misconduct in accordance
with section 5, c. of this policy and maintain it securely in accordance with this policy and applicable
law and regulation;
• provide confidentiality to those involved in the research misconduct proceeding as required by 42 cfr
§ 93.108, other applicable law, and university policy;
• notify the respondent and provide opportunities for him/her to review, comment, and respond in writing
to allegations, evidence, and committee reports in accordance with section 3, c. of this policy;
• inform respondents, complainants, and witnesses of the procedural steps in the research misconduct
proceeding;
• with the agreement of the deciding official, appoint the chair and members of the inquiry and
investigation committees, ensure that those committees are properly staffed and that there is expertise
appropriate to carry out a thorough and authoritative evaluation of the evidence;
• determine whether each person involved in handling an allegation of research misconduct has an
unresolved personal, professional, or financial conflict of interest and take appropriate action, including
recusal, to ensure that no person with such conflict is involved in the research misconduct proceeding;
• in cooperation with other university officials, take all reasonable and practical steps to protect or restore
the positions and reputations of good faith complainants, witnesses, and committee members and
counter potential or actual retaliation against them by respondents or other university members;
• keep the deciding official and others who need to know apprised of the progress of the review of the
allegation of research misconduct;
• notify and make reports to ori as required by 42 cfr part 93;
• ensure that administrative actions taken by the university and ori are enforced and take appropriate
action to notify other involved parties, such as sponsors, law enforcement agencies, professional
societies, and licensing boards of those actions; and
• maintain records of the research misconduct proceeding and make them available to ori in accordance
with section 8, d. (the investigation report) of this policy.
b. complainant
all members of the university community including faculty, staff and students have a responsibility to report
conduct that such individuals reasonably believe may constitute research misconduct. such reports should be
made to the rio, who also serves as the director of compliance and title ix coordinator, which is located in
the compliance office. the complainant is responsible for making allegations in good faith; maintaining
confidentiality regarding the allegation, the inquiry and the investigation, and; cooperating with the inquiry
and investigation. the complainant will be interviewed at the inquiry stage and given the transcript or

acd-5202– policy for responding to allegations of research misconduct
university of richmond | 5
recording of the interview for correction. the complainant will be interviewed again during an investigation,
and be given the transcript or recording of the interview for correction.1
c. respondent
the respondent is responsible for maintaining confidentiality and cooperating with the conduct of an inquiry
and investigation. the respondent is entitled to:
• a copy of this policy, at such time as the university has decided to proceed with an inquiry;
• a good faith effort from the rio to notify the respondent in writing of the complaint at the time of or
before beginning an inquiry;2
• an opportunity to comment on the inquiry report and have his/her comments attached to the report;33
• be notified of the outcome of the inquiry, and receive a copy of the inquiry report that includes a copy
o( or refers to 42 cfr part 93 and this policy;
4
• be notified in writing of the allegations to be investigated within a reasonable time after the
determination that an investigation is warranted, but before the investigation begins (within 30 days
after the university decides to begin an investigation), and be notified in writing of any new
allegations, not addressed in the inquiry or in the initial notice of investigation, within a reasonable
time after the determination to pursue those allegations;
5
• be interviewed during the investigation, have the opportunity to correct the recording or transcript,
and have the corrected recording or transcript included in the record of the investigation;
6
• have interviewed during the investigation any witness who has been reasonably identified by the
respondent as having information on relevant aspects of the investigation, have the recording or
transcript provided to the witness for correction, and have the corrected recording or transcript
included in the record of investigation;
7 and
• receive a copy of the draft investigation report and, concurrently, a copy of: or supervised access to
the evidence on which the report is based, and be notified that any comments must be submitted within
30 days of the date on which the copy was received and that the comments will be considered by the
university and addressed in the final report.
8
the respondent should be given the opportunity to admit that research misconduct occurred and that he/she
committed the research misconduct. with the advice of the rio and/or other university officials, the
deciding official may terminate the university's review of an allegation that has been admitted, if the
university's acceptance of the admission and any proposed settlement is approved by orl.
9
d. deciding official (do)
1 42 cfr § 93.310(g)
2 42 cfr §§ 93.304(c), 93.307(b)
3 42 cfr §§ 93.304(e), 93.307(f)
4 42 cfr § 308(a)
5 42 cfr § 310(c)
6 42 cfr § 3io(g)
7 42 cfr § 3lo(g)
8 42 cfr §§ 93.304(f), 93.312(a)
9 42 cfr § 93.316

acd-5202– policy for responding to allegations of research misconduct
university of richmond | 6
the deciding official (do) will receive the inquiry report and after consulting with the rio and/or other
university officials, decide whether an investigation is warranted under the criteria set forth in 42 cfr §
93.307(d). any finding that an investigation is warranted must be made in writing by the do and must be
provided to ori, together with a copy of the inquiry report meeting the requirements of 42 cfr § 93.309,
within 30 days of the finding. if it is found that an investigation is not warranted, the do and the rio will
ensure that detailed documentation of the inquiry is retained for at least 7 years after termination of the
inquiry, so that ori may assess the reasons why the university decided not to conduct an investigation.
10
the do will receive the investigation report and, after consulting with the rio and/or other university
officials, decide the extent to which this university accepts the findings of the investigation and, if research
misconduct is found, decide what, if any, university administrative actions are appropriate. the do shall
ensure that the final investigation report, the findings of the do and a description of any pending or
completed administrative actions are provided to ori, as required by 42 cfr § 93.315.
acd-5202.4 – general policies and principles
a. responsibility to report misconduct
all members of the university of richmond community, including faculty, staff and students have an
obligation to report observed, suspected, or apparent research misconduct to the rio. if an individual is
unsure whether a suspected incident falls within the definition of research misconduct, he or she may meet
with or contact the rio directly or through the provost's office to discuss the suspected research misconduct
informally, which may include discussing it confidentially and/or hypothetically. if the circumstances
described by the individual do not meet the definition of research misconduct, the rio may refer the
individual or allegation to other offices or officials with responsibility for resolving the problem.
at any time, a member of the university community may have confidential discussions and consultations
about concerns of possible misconduct with the rio and will be counseled about appropriate procedures for
reporting allegations.
b. cooperation with research misconduct proceedings
members of the university community, including faculty, staff and students will cooperate with the rio and
other university officials in the review of allegations of research misconduct and in the conduct of inquiries
and investigations. university members, including respondents have an obligation to provide evidence
relevant to research misconduct allegations to the rio or other university officials.
c. confidentiality
the rio shall, as required by 42 cfr § 93.108: (1) use reasonable efforts to limit disclosure of the identity of
respondents and complainants to those who need to know in order to carry out a thorough, competent,
objective and fair research misconduct proceeding; and (2) except as otherwise required by law, limit the
disclosure of any records or evidence from which research subjects might be identified to those who need to
know in order to carry out a research misconduct proceeding. the rio should use written confidentiality
agreements or other reasonable mechanisms to ensure that anyone who receives confidential information
relevant to an inquiry or investigation does not make any further disclosure of identifying information.
d. protecting complainants, witnesses, and committee members
10 42 cfr § 93.309(c)

acd-5202– policy for responding to allegations of research misconduct
university of richmond | 7
the university will not tolerate any retaliation of any kind against complainants, witnesses, or committee
members. members of the university community should immediately report any alleged or apparent
retaliation against complainants, witnesses or committee members to the rio, who shall review the matter
and, as necessary, make all reasonable and practical efforts to counter any potential or actual retaliation and
protect and restore the position and reputation of the person against whom the retaliation is directed.
e.
protecting the respondent
as requested and as appropriate, the rio and other university officials shall make all reasonable and practical
efforts to protect or restore the reputation of persons alleged to have engaged in research misconduct, but
against whom no finding of research misconduct is made.
11
during the research misconduct proceeding, the rio is responsible for ensuring that respondents receive all
the notices and opportunities provided for in 42 cfr part 93 and this policy. respondents may consult with
legal counsel or a non- lawyer personal adviser (who is not a principal or witness in the case) to seek advice,
but may not bring the counsel or personal adviser to interviews or meetings on the case.
f. interim administrative actions and notifying ori of special circumstances
throughout the research misconduct proceeding, the rio will review the situation to determine if there is any
threat of harm to public health, federal funds and equipment, or the integrity of the supported research
process. in the event of such a threat, the rio will, in consultation with other university officials and ori,
take appropriate interim action to protect against any such threat.
12 interim action might include additional
monitoring of the research process and the handling of federal funds and equipment, reassignment of
personnel or of the responsibility for the handling of federal funds and equipment, additional review of
research data and results or delaying publication. the rio shall, at any time during a research misconduct
proceeding, notify ori immediately if he/she has reason to believe that any of the following conditions exist:
• health or safety of the public is at risk, including an immediate need to protect human or animal
subjects;
• hhs resources or interests are threatened;
• research activities should be suspended;
• there is a reasonable indication of possible violations of civil or criminal law;
• federal action is required to protect the interests of those involved in the research misconduct
proceeding;
• the research misconduct proceeding may be made public prematurely and hhs action may be
necessary to safeguard evidence and protect the rights of those involved; or
• the research community or public should be informed.
13
acd-5202.5 - conducting the assessment and inquiry
a. assessment of allegations
11 42 cfr § 93.304(k)
12 42 cfr § 93.304(h)
13 42 cfr § 93.318

acd-5202– policy for responding to allegations of research misconduct
university of richmond | 8
upon receiving an allegation of research misconduct, the rio will immediately assess the allegation to
determine whether it is sufficiently credible and specific so that potential evidence of research misconduct may
be identified, whether it is within the jurisdictional criteria of 42 cfr § 93.i02(b), and whether the allegation
falls within the definition of research misconduct in 42 cfr § 93.103.
14 an inquiry must be conducted if these
criteria are met. if these criteria are not met, the rio can determine that there has been no research misconduct.
the rio may elect to discuss allegations that did not require an inquiry with the do at his or her discretion.
the rio is free to follow up as appropriate to ensure that best research practices are followed at the university.
the assessment period should be brief: preferably concluded within a week. in conducting the assessment, the
rio need not interview the complainant, respondent, or other witnesses, or gather data beyond any that may
have been submitted with the allegation, except as necessary to determine whether the allegation is sufficiently
credible and specific so that potential evidence of research misconduct may be identified. the rio shall, on or
before the date on which the respondent is notified of the allegation, obtain custody of: inventory, and sequester
all research records and evidence needed to conduct the research misconduct proceeding, as provided in
paragraph c. of this section.
b. initiation and purpose of the inquiry
if the rio determines that the criteria for an inquiry are met, he or she will immediately initiate the inquiry
process. the purpose of the inquiry is to conduct an initial review of the available evidence to determine
whether to conduct an investigation. an inquiry does not require a full review of all the evidence related to the
allegation.
15
c. notice to respondent; sequestration of research records
at the time of or before beginning an inquiry, the rio must make a good faith effort to notify the respondent in
writing, if the respondent is known. if the inquiry subsequently identifies additional respondents, they must be
notified in writing. on or before the date on which the respondent is notified, or the inquiry begins, whichever
is earlier, the rio must take all reasonable and practical steps to obtain custody of all the research records and
evidence needed to conduct the research misconduct proceeding, inventory the records and evidence and
sequester them in a secure manner, except that where the research records or evidence encompass scientific
instruments shared by a number of users, custody may be limited to copies of the data or evidence on such
instruments, so long as those copies are substantially equivalent to the evidentiary value of the instruments.
16
the rio may consult with ori for advice and assistance in this regard.
d. appointment of the inquiry committee
the rio, in consultation with other university officials as appropriate, will appoint an inquiry committee and
committee chair as soon after the initiation of the inquiry as is practical. the inquiry committee must consist of
individuals who do not have unresolved personal, professional, or financial conflicts of interest with those
involved with the inquiry and should include individuals with the appropriate scientific expertise to evaluate the
evidence and issues related to the allegation, interview the principals and key witnesses, and conduct the
inquiry.
17
e. charge to the committee and first meeting
the rio will prepare a charge for the inquiry committee that:
14 42 cfr § 93.307(a)
15 42 cfr § 93.307(c)
16 42 cfr §§ 93.305, 93.307(b)
17 42 cfr § 93.304(b)

acd-5202– policy for responding to allegations of research misconduct
university of richmond | 9
• sets forth the time for completion of the inquiry;
• describes the allegations and any related issues identified during the allegation assessment;
• states that the purpose of the inquiry is to conduct an initial review of the evidence, including the
testimony of the respondent, complainant and key witnesses, to determine whether an investigation is
recommended, not to determine whether research misconduct definitely occurred or who was
responsible;
• states that an investigation is recommended if the committee determines: (1) there is a reasonable
basis for concluding that the allegation falls within the definition of research misconduct and is within
the jurisdictional criteria of 42 cfr § 93.102(b); and, (2) the allegation may have substance, based on
the committee's review during the inquiry.
• informs the inquiry committee that they are responsible for preparing or directing the preparation of a
written report of the inquiry that meets the requirements of this policy and 42 cfr § 93.309(a).
at the committee's first meeting, the rio will review the charge with the committee, discuss the allegations,
any related issues, and the appropriate procedures for conducting the inquiry, assist the committee with
organizing plans for the inquiry, and answer any questions raised by the committee. the rio will be present or
available throughout the inquiry to advise the committee as needed.
f. inquiry process
the inquiry committee will normally interview the complainant, the respondent, and key witnesses as well as
examining relevant research records and materials. then the inquiry committee will evaluate the evidence,
including the testimony obtained during the inquiry. after consultation with the rio, the committee members
will decide whether an investigation is recommended based on the criteria in this policy and 42 cfr §
93.307(d). the scope of the inquiry is not required to and does not normally include deciding whether
misconduct definitely occurred, determining definitely who committed the research misconduct or conducting
exhaustive interviews and analyses. however, if an admission of research misconduct is made by the
respondent, misconduct may be determined at the inquiry stage if all relevant issues are resolved. in that case,
the university shall promptly consult with ori to determine the next steps that should be taken. see section 9
(completion of cases; reporting premature closures to ori).
g. time for completion
the inquiry, including preparation of the :final inquiry report and the decision of the do on whether an
investigation is warranted, must be completed within 60 calendar days of initiation of the inquiry, unless the
rio determines that circumstances reasonably warrant a longer period. if the rio approves an extension, the
inquiry record must include documentation of the reasons for exceeding the 60-day period.
18 the respondent
will be notified of the extension, if one is made.
acd-5202.6 – the inquiry report
a. elements of the inquiry report
a written inquiry report must be prepared that includes the following information:
the name and position of the respondent; (2) a description of the allegations of research misconduct; (3) any
federal grant support, including, for example, grant numbers, grant applications, contracts and publications
18 42 cfr § 93.307(g)

acd-5202– policy for responding to allegations of research misconduct
university of richmond | 10
listing federal support; (4) the basis for recommending or not recommending that the allegations warrant an
investigation; (5) any comments on the draft report by the respondent or complainant.19
university counsel should review the report for legal sufficiency. modifications should be made as appropriate
in consultation with the rio and the inquiry committee. the inquiry report should include: the names and
titles of the committee members and experts who conducted the inquiry; a summary of the inquiry process used;
a list of the research records reviewed; summaries of any interviews; and whether any other actions should be
taken if an investigation is not recommended.
b. notification to the respondent and opportunity to comment
the rio shall notify the respondent in writing of the results of the inquiry. the rio will include a copy of the
draft inquiry report for comment within 10 days, and include a copy of or refer to 42 cfr part 93 and this
policy.
20 the rio, at his/her discretion, may notify the complainant whether the inquiry found an investigation
to be recommended and may provide relevant portions of the inquiry report to the complainant for comment
within 10 days. a confidentiality agreement will be a condition for access to the report materials. the
university also retains the right to redact names from the report or report sections as it determines appropriate.
any comments that are submitted by the respondent or complainant will be attached to the final inquiry report.
based on the comments, the inquiry committee may revise the draft report as appropriate and prepare it in final
form. the committee will deliver the final report to the rio.
c. university decision and notification
1. decision by deciding official
the rio will transmit the final inquiry report and any comments to the do, who will determine in
writing whether an investigation is warranted. the inquiry is completed when the do makes this
determination.
2. notification to ori
within 30 calendar days of the do's decision that an investigation is warranted, the rio will provide
ori with the do' s written decision and a copy of the inquiry report. the rio will also notify
university officials who need to know of the do's decision. the rio must provide the following
information to ori upon request: (1) the university policies and procedures under which the inquiry
was conducted; (2) the research records and evidence reviewed, transcripts or recordings of any
interviews, and copies of all relevant documents; and (3) the charges to be considered in the
investigation.
21
3. documentation of decision not to investigate
if the do decides that an investigation is not warranted, the rio shall secure and maintain for 7 years
after the termination of the inquiry sufficiently detailed documentation of the inquiry to permit a later
assessment by ori of the reasons why an investigation was not conducted. these documents must be
provided to ori or other authorized hhs personnel upon request. in situations where an investigation
is not warranted, the do and the rio are free to follow up to ensure that best research practices are
followed at the university.
19 42 cfr § 93.309(a)
20 42 cfr § 93.308(a)
21 42 cfr § 93.309(a) and (b)

acd-5202– policy for responding to allegations of research misconduct
university of richmond | 11
acd-5202.7 - conducting the investigation
a. initiation and purpose
the investigation must begin within 30 calendar days after the determination by the do that an investigation is
warranted.22 the purpose of the investigation is to develop a factual record by exploring the allegations in
detail and examining the evidence in depth, leading to recommended findings on whether research misconduct
has been committed, by whom, and to what extent. the investigation will also determine whether there are
additional instances of possible research misconduct that would justify broadening the scope beyond the initial
allegations. this is particularly important where the alleged research misconduct involves clinical trials or
potential harm to human subjects or the general public or if it affects research that forms the basis for public
policy, clinical practice, or public health practice. under 42 cfr § 93.3b the findings of the investigation must
be set forth in an investigation report.
b. notifying ori and respondent; sequestration of research records
on or before the date on which the investigation begins, the rio must: (1) notify the ori director of the
decision to begin the investigation and provide ori a copy of the inquiry report; and (2) notify the respondent
in writing of the allegations to be investigated. the rio must also give the respondent written notice of any
new allegations of research misconduct within a reasonable amount of time of deciding to pursue allegations not
addressed during the inquiry or in the initial notice of the investigation.
23
the rio will, prior to notifying respondent of the allegations, take all reasonable and practical steps to obtain
custody of and sequester in a secure manner all research records and evidence needed to conduct the research
misconduct proceeding that were not previously sequestered during the inquiry. the need for additional
sequestration of records for the investigation may occur for any number of reasons, including the university's
decision to investigate additional allegations not considered during the inquiry stage or the identification of
records during the inquiry process that had not been previously secured. the procedures to be followed for
sequestration during the investigation are the same procedures that apply during the inquiry.
24
c. appointment of the investigation committee
the rio, in consultation with other university officials as appropriate, will appoint an investigation committee
and the committee chair as soon after the beginning of the investigation as is practical. the investigation
committee must consist of individuals who do not have unresolved personal, professional, or financial conflicts
of interest with those involved with the investigation and should include individuals with the appropriate
scientific expertise to evaluate the evidence and issues related to the allegation, interview the respondent and
complainant and conduct the investigation. individuals appointed to the investigation committee may also have
served on the inquiry committee. when necessary to secure the necessary expertise or to avoid conflicts of
interest, the rio may select committee members from outside the university. the university will notify the
respondent of the proposed committee membership to give the respondent an opportunity to object to a
proposed member based upon a personal, professional, or financial conflict of interest. the period for
submitting objections will be no more than five calendar days. the university do will make the final
determination of whether a conflict exists.
d. charge to the committee and the first meeting
22 42 cfr § 93.3lo(a)
23 42 cfr § 93.310(b) and (c)
24 42 cfr § 93.310(d)

acd-5202– policy for responding to allegations of research misconduct
university of richmond | 12
1. charge to the committee
the rio will define the subject matter of the investigation in a written charge to the committee that:
• describes the allegations and related issues identified during the inquiry;
• identifies the respondent;
• informs the committee that it must conduct the investigation as prescribed in paragraph e of this
section;
• defines research misconduct;
• informs the committee that it must evaluate the evidence and testimony to determine whether,
based on a preponderance of the evidence, research misconduct occurred and, if so, the type and
extent of it and who was responsible;
• informs the committee that in order to determine that the respondent committed research
misconduct it must find that a preponderance of the evidence establishes that: (1) research
misconduct, as defined in this policy, occurred (respondent has the burden of proving by a
preponderance of the evidence any affirmative defenses raised, including honest error or a
difference of opinion); (2) the research misconduct is a significant departure from accepted
practices of the relevant research community; and (3) the respondent committed the research
misconduct intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly; and
• informs the committee that it must prepare or direct the preparation of a written investigation
report that meets the requirements of this policy and 42 cfr § 93.313.
2. first meeting
the rio will convene the first meeting of the investigation committee to review the charge, the inquiry
report, and the prescribed procedures and standards for the conduct of the investigation including the
necessity for confidentiality and for developing a specific investigation plan. the investigation
committee will be provided with a copy of this policy and 42 cfr part 93. the rio will be present or
available throughout the investigation to advise the committee as needed. other university officials
will be available throughout the investigation to advise the committee as appropriate. such officials
will be subject to the confidentiality provisions of this policy.
e. investigation process
the investigation committee and the rio must:
• use diligent efforts to ensure that the investigation is thorough and sufficiently documented and
includes examination of all research records and evidence relevant to reaching a decision on the
merits of each allegation;
25
• take reasonable steps to ensure an impartial and unbiased investigation to the maximum extent
practica1;
26
25 42 cfr § 93.3lo(e)
26 42 cfr § 93.310(:t)

acd-5202– policy for responding to allegations of research misconduct
university of richmond | 13
• interview each respondent, complainant, and any other available person who has been reasonably
identified as having information regarding any relevant aspects of the investigation, including
witnesses identified by the respondent, and record or transcribe each interview, provide the
recording or transcript to the interviewee for correction and include the recording or transcript in
the record of the investigation;27 and
• pursue diligently all significant issues and leads discovered that are determined relevant to the
investigation, including any evidence of any additional instances of possible research
misconduct, and continue the investigation to completion.
28
f. time for completion
the investigation is to be completed within 120 days of beginning it, including conducting the investigation,
preparing the report of findings, providing the draft report for comment and sending the final report to ori.
however, if the rio determines that the investigation will not be completed within this 120-day period,
he/she will submit to ori a written request for an extension, setting forth the reasons for the delay. the
rio will ensure that periodic progress reports are filed with ori, if ori grants the request for an extension
and directs the filing of such reports.
29
acd-5202.8 – the investigation report
a. elements of the investigation report
the investigation committee and the rio are responsible for preparing a written draft report of the
investigation that:
• describes the nature of the allegation of research misconduct, including identification of the
respondent;
• describes and documents any grant support, including, for example, the numbers of any grants
that are involved, grant applications, contracts, and publications listing grant support;
• describes the specific allegations of research misconduct considered in the investigation;
• includes the university policies and procedures under which the investigation was conducted,
unless those policies and procedures were provided to ori previously;
• identifies and summarizes the research records and evidence reviewed and identifies any
evidence taken into custody but not reviewed; and
• includes a statement of findings for each allegation of research misconduct identified during the
investigation.
30 each statement of findings must:·(1) identify whether the research misconduct
was falsification, fabrication, or plagiarism, and whether it was committed intentionally,
knowingly, or recklessly; (2) summarize the facts and the analysis that support the conclusion
and consider the merits of any reasonable explanation by the respondent, including any effort by
respondent to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that he or she did not engage in
27 42 cfr § 93.310(g)
28 42 cfr § 93.310(h)
29 42 cfr § 93.311
30 42 cfr § 93.313

acd-5202– policy for responding to allegations of research misconduct
university of richmond | 14
research misconduct because of honest error or a difference of opinion; (3) identify specific grant
support; (4) identify whether any publications need correction or retraction; (5) identify the
person(s) responsible for the misconduct; and (6) list any current support or known applications
or proposals for support that the respondent has pending with any federal agencies.
31
university counsel should review the report for legal sufficiency. modifications should be made as
appropriate in consultation with the rio and the investigation committee.
b. comments on the draft report and access to evidence
1. respondent
the rio must give the respondent a copy of the draft investigation report for comment and,
concurrently, a copy of, or supervised access to the evidence on which the report is based. the
respondent will be allowed 30 days from the date he/she received the draft report to submit
comments to the rio. the respondent's comments must be included and considered in the final
report.
32
2. confidentiality
in distributing the draft report, or portions thereof, to the respondent, the rio will inform the
recipient of the confidentiality under which the draft report is made available and may establish
reasonable conditions to ensure such confidentiality. for example, the rio may require that the
recipient sign a confidentiality agreement.
c. decision by deciding official
the rio will assist the investigation committee in finalizing the draft investigation report, including ensuring
that the respondent's comments are included and considered, and transmit the final investigation report to the
do, who will determine in writing: (1) whether the university accepts the investigation report, its findings, and
the recommended university actions; and (2) the appropriate university actions in response to the accepted
findings of research misconduct. if this determination varies from the findings of the investigation committee,
the do will, as part of his/her written determination, explain in detail the basis for rendering a decision different
from the findings of the investigation committee. alternatively, the do may return the report to the
investigation committee with a request for further fact-finding or analysis.
when a final decision on the case has been reached, the rio will normally notify both the respondent and the
complainant in writing. after informing ori, the do will determine whether law enforcement agencies,
professional societies, professional licensing boards, editors of journals in which falsified reports may have
been published, collaborators of the respondent in the work, or other relevant parties should be notified of the
outcome of the case. the rio is responsible for ensuring compliance with all notification requirements of
funding or sponsoring agencies.
d. notice to ori of university findings and actions
unless an extension has been granted, the rio must, within the 120-day period for completing the
investigation, submit the following to ori: (1) a copy of the final investigation report with all attachments; (2) a
statement of whether the university accepts the findings of the investigation report; (3) a statement of whether
31 42 cfr § 93.313(:t)
32 42 cfr §§ 93.312(a), 93.313(g)

acd-5202– policy for responding to allegations of research misconduct
university of richmond | 15
the university found misconduct and, if so, who committed the misconduct; and (4) a description of any
pending or completed administrative actions against the respondent.33
e. maintaining records for review by ori
the rio must maintain and provide to ori upon request "records of research misconduct proceedings" as that
term is defined by 42 cfr § 93.317. unless custody has been transferred to hhs or ori has advised in writing
that the records no longer need to be retained, records of research misconduct proceedings must be maintained
in a secure manner for 7 years after completion of the proceeding or the completion of any federal proceeding
involving the research misconduct allegation.34 the rio is also responsible for providing any information,
documentation, research records, evidence or clarification requested by ori to carry out its review of an
allegation of research misconduct or of the university's handling of such an allegation.35
acd-5202.9 - completion of cases; reporting premature closures to ori
generally, all inquiries and investigations will be carried through to completion and all significant issues will be
pursued diligently. the rio must notify ori in advance if there are plans to close a case at the inquiry or
investigation stage on the basis that respondent has admitted guilt, a settlement with the respondent has been
reached, or for any other reason, except: (1) closing of a case at the inquiry stage on the basis that an
investigation is not warranted; or (2) a finding of no misconduct at the investigation stage, which must be
reported to ori, as prescribed in this policy and 42 cfr § 93.315.36
acd-5202.10 - university administrative actions
if the do determines that research misconduct is substantiated by the findings, he or she will decide on the
appropriate actions to be taken, after consultation with the rio. the administrative actions may include, but are
not limited to, the following:
• withdrawal or correction of all pending or published abstracts and papers emanating from the
research where research misconduct was found;
• removal of the responsible person from the particular project, letter of reprimand, special
monitoring of future work, probation, suspension, salary reduction, or initiation of steps leading
to possible rank reduction or termination of employment;
• restitution of funds to the grantor agency as appropriate; and
• other action appropriate to the research misconduct and consistent with appropriate university
policies and procedures, including the faculty handbook.
acd-5202.11 – other considerations
a. termination or resignation prior to completing inquiry or investigation
33 42 cfr § 93.315
34 42 cfr § 93.317(b)
35 42 cfr §§ 93.300(g), 93.403(b) and (d)
36 42 cfr § 93.316(a)

acd-5202– policy for responding to allegations of research misconduct
university of richmond | 16
the termination of the respondent's university employment, by resignation or otherwise, before or after an
allegation of possible research misconduct has been reported, will not preclude or terminate the research
misconduct proceeding or otherwise limit any of the university's responsibilities under 42 cfr part 93.
if the respondent, without admitting to the misconduct, elects to resign his or her position after the university
receives an allegation of research misconduct, the assessment of the allegation will proceed, as well as the
inquiry and investigation, as appropriate based on the outcome of the preceding steps. if the respondent refuses
to participate in the process after resignation, the rio and any inquiry or investigation committee will use their
best efforts to reach a conclusion concerning the allegations, noting in the report the respondent's failure to
cooperate and its effect on the evidence.
b. restoration of the respondent's reputation
following a final finding of no research misconduct, including ori concurrence where required by 42 cfr part
93, the rio must, at the request of the respondent, undertake all reasonable and practical efforts to restore the
respondent's reputation.
37 depending on the particular circumstances and the views of the respondent, the rio
should consider notifying those individuals aware of or involved in the investigation of the final outcome,
publicizing the final outcome in any forum in which the allegation of research misconduct was previously
publicized, and expunging all reference to the research misconduct allegation from the respondent's personnel
file. any university actions to restore the respondent's reputation should first be approved by the do.
c. protection of the complainant, witnesses and committee members
during the research misconduct proceeding and upon its completion, regardless of whether the university or
ori determines that research misconduct occurred, the rio must undertake all reasonable and practical efforts
to protect the position and reputation ot: or to counter potential or actual retaliation against, any complainant
who made allegations of research misconduct in good faith and of any witnesses and committee members who
cooperate in good faith with the research misconduct proceeding.
38 the do will determine, after consulting
with the rio, and with the complainant, witnesses, or committee members, respectively, what steps, if any, are
needed to restore their respective positions or reputations or to counter potential or actual retaliation against
them. the rio is responsible for implementing any steps the do approves.
d. allegations not made in good faith
if relevant, the do will determine whether the complainant's allegations of research misconduct were made in
good faith, or whether a witness or committee member acted in good faith. if the do determines that there was
an absence of good faith he/she will determine whether any administrative action should be recommended
against the person who failed to act in good faith.
acd-5202.12 – applicable regulations & accreditation standards
department of health and human services: 42 cfr
§ 93
acd-5202.13 – appendix a
appendix a - research integrity officer responsibilities
i. general
the research integrity officer (rio) has lead responsibility for ensuring that the university:
37 42 cfr § 93.304(k)
38 42 cfr § 93.304(1)

acd-5202– policy for responding to allegations of research misconduct
university of richmond | 17
• takes all reasonable and practical steps to foster a research environment that promotes the responsible
conduct of research, research training, and activities related to that research or research training,
discourages research misconduct, and deals promptly with allegations or evidence of possible research
misconduct.
• has written policies and procedures for responding to allegations of research misconduct and reporting
information about that response to ori, as required by 42 cfr part 93.
• complies with its written policies and procedures and the requirements of 42 cfr part 93.
• informs its university members who are subject to 42 cfr part 93 about its research misconduct
policies and procedures and its commitment to compliance with those policies and procedures.
• takes appropriate interim action during a research misconduct proceeding to protect public health,
federal funds and equipment, and the integrity of the research process.
ii. notice and reporting to ori and cooperation with ori
the rio has lead responsibility for ensuring that the university:
• files an annual report with ori containing the information prescribed by ori.
• sends to ori with the annual report such other aggregated information as ori may prescribe on the
university's research misconduct proceedings and the university's compliance with 42 cfr part 93.
• notifies ori immediately if, at any time during the research misconduct proceeding, it has reason to
believe that health or safety of the public is at risk, federal grant resources or interests are threatened,
research activities should be suspended, there is reasonable indication of possible violations of civil or
criminal law, federal action is required to protect the interests of those involved in the research
misconduct proceeding, the university believes that the research misconduct proceeding may be made
public prematurely, or the research community or the public should be informed.
• provides ori with the written finding by the deciding official that an investigation is warranted and a
copy of the inquiry report, within 30 days of the date on which the finding is made.
• notifies ori of the decision to begin an investigation on or before the date the investigation begins.
• within 120 days of beginning an investigation, or such additional days as may be granted by ori,
provides ori with the investigation report, a statement of whether the university accepts the
investigation's findings, a statement of whether the university found research misconduct and, if so, who
committed it, and a description of any pending or completed administrative actions against the
respondent.
• seeks advance ori approval if the university plans to close a case at the inquiry or investigation stage
on the basis that the respondent has admitted guilt, a settlement with the respondent has been reached, or
for any other reason, except the closing of a case at the inquiry stage on the basis that an investigation is
not warranted or a finding of no misconduct at the investigation stage.
• cooperates fully with ori during its oversight review and any subsequent administrative hearings,
including providing all research records and evidence under the university's control, custody, or

acd-5202– policy for responding to allegations of research misconduct
university of richmond | 18
possession and access to all persons within its authority necessary to develop a complete record of
relevant evidence.
iii. research misconduct proceeding
a. general
the rio is responsible for:
• promptly taking all reasonable and practical steps to obtain custody of all research records and evidence
needed to conduct the research misconduct proceeding, inventory the records and evidence, and
sequester them in a secure manner.
• taking all reasonable and practical steps to ensure the cooperation of respondents and other university
members with research misconduct proceedings, including, but not limited to their providing
information, research records and evidence.
• providing confidentiality to those involved in the research misconduct proceeding as required by 42
cfr § 93.108, other applicable law, and university policy.
• determining whether each person involved in handling an allegation of research misconduct has an
unresolved personal, professional or :financial conflict of interest and taking appropriate action,
including recusal, to ensure that no person with such a conflict is involved in the research misconduct
proceeding.
• keeping the deciding official (do) and others who need to know apprised of the progress of the review
of the allegation of research misconduct.
• in cooperation with other university officials, taking all reasonable and practical steps to protect or
restore the positions and reputations of good faith complainants, witnesses, and committee members and
to counter potential or actual retaliation against them by respondents or other university members.
• making all reasonable and practical efforts, if requested and as appropriate, to protector restore the
reputation of persons alleged to have engaged in research misconduct, but against whom no finding of
research misconduct is made.
• assisting the do in implementing his/her decision to take administrative action against any
complainant, witness, or committee member determined by the do not to have acted in good faith.
• maintaining records of the research misconduct proceeding, as defined in 42 cfr §93.317, in a secure
manner for 7 years after completion of the proceeding, or the completion of any ori proceeding
involving the allegation of research misconduct, whichever is later, unless custody of the records has
been transferred to ori or ori has advised that the records no longer need to be retained.
• ensuring that administrative actions taken by the university and ori are enforced and taking
appropriate action to notify other involved parties, such as sponsors, law enforcement agencies,
professional societies, and licensing boards, of those actions.
b. allegation receipt and assessment
the rio is responsible for:
• consulting confidentially with persons uncertain about whether to submit an allegation of research
misconduct.

acd-5202– policy for responding to allegations of research misconduct
university of richmond | 19
• receiving allegations of research misconduct.
• assessing each allegation of research misconduct to determine ifan inquiry is warranted because the
allegation falls within the definition of research misconduct, is within the jurisdictional criteria of 42
cfr § 93.102(b), and is sufficiently credible and specific so that potential evidence of research
misconduct may be identified.
c. inquiry
the rio is responsible for:
• initiating the inquiry process if it is determined that an inquiry is warranted.
• at the time of, or before beginning the inquiry, making a good faith effort to notify the respondent in
writing, if the respondent is known.
• on or before the date on which the respondent is notified, or the inquiry begins, whichever is earlier,
taking all reasonable and practical steps to obtain custody of all research records and evidence needed to
conduct the research misconduct proceeding, inventorying the records and evidence and sequestering
them in a secure manner, except that where the research records or evidence encompass scientific
instruments shared by a number of users, custody may be limited to copies of the data or evidence on the
instruments, so long as those copies are substantially equivalent to the evidentiary value of the
instruments.
• appointing an inquiry committee and committee chair as soon after the initiation of the inquiry as is
practical.
• preparing a charge for the inquiry committee in accordance with the university's policies and
procedures.
• convening the first meeting of the inquiry committee and at that meeting briefing the committee on the
allegations, the charge to the committee, and the appropriate procedures for conducting the inquiry,
including the need for confidentiality and for developing a plan for the inquiry, and assisting the
committee with organizational and other issues that may arise.
• providing the inquiry committee with needed logistical support, e.g., expert advice, including forensic
analysis of evidence, and clerical support, including arranging witness interviews and recording or
transcribing those interviews.
• being available or present throughout the inquiry to advise the committee as needed and consulting with
the committee prior to its decision on whether an investigation is recommended on the basis of the
criteria in the university's policies and procedures and 42 cfr § 93.307(d).
• determining whether circumstances clearly warrant a period longer than 60 days to complete the inquiry
(including preparation of the final inquiry report and the decision of the do on whether an investigation
is warranted), approving an extension if warranted, and documenting the reasons for exceeding the 60-
day period in the record of the research misconduct proceeding.
• assisting the inquiry committee in preparing a draft inquiry report, sending the respondent a copy of the
draft report for comment (and the complainant relevant portions of the report, at the rio's discretion)
within a time period that permits the inquiry to be completed within the allotted time, taking appropriate
action to protect the confidentiality of the draft report, receiving any comments from the respondent (and
the complainant if applicable), and ensuring that the comments are attached to the final inquiry report.

acd-5202– policy for responding to allegations of research misconduct
university of richmond | 20
• receiving the final inquiry report from the inquiry committee and forwarding it, together with any
comments the rio may wish to make, to the do who will determine in writing whether an investigation
is warranted.
• within 30 days of a do decision that an investigation is warranted, providing ori with the written
finding and a copy of the inquiry report and notifying those university officials who need to know of the
decision.
• notifying the respondent (and the complainant, at the rio's discretion) whether the inquiry found an
investigation to be recommended and including in the notice copies of or a reference to 42 cfr part 93
and the university's research misconduct policies and procedures.
• providing to ori, upon request, the university policies and procedures under which the inquiry was
conducted, the research records and evidence reviewed, transcripts or recordings of any interviews,
copies of all relevant documents, and the allegations to be considered in the investigation.
• if the do decides that an investigation is not warranted, securing and maintaining for 7 years after the
termination of the inquiry sufficiently detailed documentation of the inquiry to permit a later assessment
by ori of the reasons why an investigation was not conducted.
d. investigation
the rio is responsible for:
• initiating the investigation within 30 calendar days after the determination by the do that an
investigation is warranted.
• on or before the date on which the investigation begins: (1) notifying ori of the decision to begin the
investigation and providing ori a copy of the inquiry report; and (2) notifying the respondent in writing
of the allegations to be investigated.
• prior to notifying respondent of the allegations, taking all reasonable and practical steps to obtain
custody of and sequester in a secure manner all research records and evidence needed to conduct the
research misconduct proceeding that were not previously sequestered during the inquiry.
• in consultation with other university officials as appropriate, appointing an investigation committee and
committee chair as soon after the initiation of the investigation as is practical.
• preparing a charge for the investigation committee in accordance with the university's policies and
procedures.
• convening the first meeting of the investigation committee and at that meeting: (1) briefing the
committee on the charge, the inquiry report and the procedures and standards for the conduct of the
investigation, including the need for confidentiality and developing a specific plan for the investigation;
and (2) providing committee members a copy of the university's policies and procedures and 42 cfr
part 93.
• providing the investigation committee with needed logistical support, e.g., expert advice, including
forensic analysis of evidence, and clerical support, including arranging interviews with witnesses and
recording or transcribing those interviews.
• being available or present throughout the investigation to advise the committee as needed.

acd-5202– policy for responding to allegations of research misconduct
university of richmond | 21
• on behalf of the university, the rio is responsible for each of the following steps and for ensuring that
the investigation committee: (i) uses diligent efforts to conduct an investigation that includes an
examination of all research records and evidence relevant to reaching a decision on the merits of the
allegations and that is otherwise thorough and sufficiently documented; (2) takes reasonable steps to
ensure an impartial and unbiased investigation to the maximum extent practical; (3) interviews each
respondent, complainant, and any other available person who has been reasonably identified as having
information regarding any relevant aspects of the investigation, including witnesses identified by the
respondent, and records or transcribes each interview, provides the recording or transcript to the
interviewee for correction, and includes the recording or transcript in the record of the research
misconduct proceeding; and (4) pursues diligently all significant issues and leads discovered that are
determined relevant to the investigation, including any evidence of any additional instances of possible
research misconduct, and continues the investigation to completion.
• upon determining that the investigation cannot be completed within 120 days of its initiation (including
providing the draft report for comment and sending the final report with any comments to ori),
submitting a request to ori for an extension of the 120-day period that includes a statement of the
reasons for the extension. if the extension is granted, the rio will file periodic progress reports with
ori.
• assisting the investigation committee in preparing a draft investigation report that meets the
requirements of 42 cfr part 93 and the university's policies and procedures, sending the respondent a
copy of the draft report for his/her comment within 30 days of receipt, taking appropriate action to
protect the confidentiality of the draft report, receiving any comments from the respondent and ensuring
that the comments are included and considered in the final investigation report.
• transmitting the draft investigation report to university counsel for a review of its legal sufficiency.
• assisting the investigation committee in finalizing the draft investigation report and receiving the final
report from the committee.
• transmitting the final investigation report to the do and: (1) if the do determines that further fact:-
finding or analysis is needed, receiving the report back from the do for that purpose; (2) if the do
determines whether or not to accept the report, its findings and the recommended university actions,
transmitting to ori within the time period for completing the investigation, a copy of the final
investigation report with all attachments, a statement of whether the university accepts the findings of
the report, a statement of whether the university found research misconduct, and if so, who committed
it, and a description of any pending or completed administrative actions against the respondent.
• when a final decision on the case is reached, the rio will normally notify both the respondent and the
complainant in writing and will determine whether law enforcement agencies, professional societies,
professional licensing boards, editors of involved journals, collaborators of the respondent, or other
relevant parties should be notified of the outcome of the case.
• maintaining and providing to ori upon request all relevant research records and records of the
university's research misconduct proceeding, including the results of all interviews and the transcripts or
recordings of those interviews.

acd-5202 – policy for responding to allegations for research misconduct
acd-5202.13 - appendix b - summary of ur research misconduct reporting steps (flow chart)
r
esponsible complaint made to research integrity officer (rio)
rio assesses complaint
if the rio determines that a research misconduct
inquiry is not warranted, the process ends. the
rio is free to follow-up as appropriate to ensure
that best practices are followed at the university.
in some cases, the rio may report this
determination to the deciding official (do).
if the rio determines that the complaint is
credible; meets the definition of research
misconduct, and; that an inquiry is justified by the
complaint, then the rio will appoint an inquiry
committee and chair in consultation with the do.
i
nquiry conducted
i
nquiry committee reports to do whether or not an investigation is recommended
d
eciding official reviews written inquiry report and determines whether or not an
investigation is warranted
if the do determines that an investigation is not
warranted, the process stops. the do and rio are
free to follow up to ensure best practices.
if the do determines that an investigation is
warranted, he directs that the rio inform the u.s.
office of research integrity (oir).
the inquiry report and supporting evidence are
filed. this file must be maintained for at least 7
years and is subject to review by the u.s. oir.
an investigation committee is appointed.
the allegation of misconduct must be reported to
oir on the university's annual report on possible
research misconduct.
the committee (with the rio) prepares an
investigation report for the do.
t
he do determines in writing:
1. whether or not the university accepts the report of the investigation committee and;
2. what actions are appropriate for the university to take
t
he rio submits the final investigation report and other materials as
appropriate to oir.
university of richmond | 22

university of richmond | 23
university of richmond
policy manual
related policies:
n/a
policy background:
this policy was previously contained in a policy guide for institutional research. the prior policy was
published on december 8, 2009. the current policy was approved by the provost on january 31, 2011. it was
reformatted for the policy library and reviewed by the research integrity officer on october 31, 2018
policy contacts:
director of compliance and title ix coordinator [acting research integrity officer or rio]