university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
the university of richmond fosters an environment to promote a safe, secure, and inclusive campus
community and an appropriate environment for living and learning.
scope:
this policy applies to all individuals on university of richmond property to include: students, faculty, staff,
alumni, visitors, guests, contractors, volunteers, affiliates and the general public.
index:
sec-2010.1…………definitions
sec-2010.2………... policy
sec-2010.3………... exclusions
sec-2010.4………... procedures
policy statement:
sec-2010.1 – definitions
university of richmond property
any property, vehicle or vessel owned, leased or controlled by the university of richmond in direct support
of or in a manner related to, it's educational purposes, including all campus buildings, parking lots and areas
frequently used by students, or in support of university purposes.
policy #: sec-2010
policy title: policy prohibiting firearms on campus
effective: may 6, 2005 responsible office: business affairs
date
approved:
may 6, 2005 approval: board of trustees
replaces
policy dated:
n/a responsible
university official:
associate vice president for public safety
and chief of police

sec-1020– policy prohibiting firearms on campus
university of richmond | 2
firearm
any actual or simulated pistol, revolver, rifle, shotgun, air-pistol, paintball gun, or other weapon designed or
intended to propel a projectile of any kind by action of an explosion, compressed air or and combustible
material.
sec-2010.2 – policy
no person employed by the university of richmond or any student or visitor to university buildings,
facilities, vehicles or university property shall possess a firearm on university property. realistic-looking toy
or replica firearms are also prohibited.
sec-2010.3 – exclusions
on or off duty law enforcement personnel may possess firearms on campus.
licensed security officers or other armed carriers contracted by the university and approved by the university
chief of police may possess a firearm on campus for the purpose of their contracted employment.
officially recognized sport clubs and academic organizations, under the supervision of a faculty or staff
advisor may be authorized to store prohibited items in designated areas. approval will be granted on a case-
by-case basis by the vice president of student development and the university chief of police
faculty or staff legally permitted to possess a weapon in the jurisdiction in which they are located, may do so
on the premise of the university if possessing the firearm is directly related to an academic or research
activity. such use must have received written approval by the university chief of police.
sec-2010.4 –procedure
entry upon university of richmond property in violation of this policy is forbidden. persons violating this
policy will be asked to remove the weapon immediately from university property. based on availability, the
university police department may be able to store a firearm for an invited guest on campus for an academic
reason until their event has concluded and will be leaving the university.
members of the university community in violation of this policy are subject to disciplinary action. visitors
and guests that are non-compliant in removing a firearm will be asked to leave and are welcome to return to
campus without a firearm. further non-compliance of this policy may result in removal from campus under
the code of virginia trespass statute.
policy background:
university of richmond board of trustees approved policy may 06, 2005
non-substantive clarifications included when policy was included in the policy library in march 2023.
policy contacts:
associate vice president of public safety and chief of police