university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
this policy is designed to foster adherence to the university of richmond's commitment to non-
discrimination and to ensure compliance with applicable laws.
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right
to elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
index:
hr
m-5008.1 .....policy
hrm-5008.2 .....definitions
hrm-5008.3 .....non-discrimination
hrm-5008.4 .....reasonable accommodations
hrm-5008.5 .....lactation space and break time
hrm-5008.6 .....confidentiality
hrm-5008.7 .....anti-retaliation
policy statement:
go
v-hrm-5008.1 – policy
t
he university is committed to providing equal opportunity and reasonable accommodations to its employees
who are pregnant, lactating, or have conditions related to pregnancy or childbirth. the university prohibits
discrimination on the basis of current, potential, or past pregnancy, childbirth, or related conditions.
policy #: hrm-5008 policy title: policy on pregnancy, childbirth, lactation, and
related conditions – faculty and staff
effective: august 22, 2024 responsible
office:
human resources
date
approved:
august 22, 2024 approval: chief human resources officer
vice president and general counsel
responsible
university
official:
chief human resources officer

hrm-5008 – policy on pregnancy, childbirth, lactation, and related
conditions – faculty and staff
university of richmond | 2
the university is committed to preventing and responding to conduct that violates this policy. any individual
whose conduct violates this policy may be subject to disciplinary action in accordance with applicable
university policies and procedures.
gov- hrm-5008.2 - definitions
limitation, for purposes of this policy, means a physical or mental condition related to, affected by, or arising
out of pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions. "physical or mental condition" is an impediment
or problem that may be modest, minor, and/or episodic. the physical or mental condition may also be that an
employee or applicant affected by pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions has a need or a
problem related to maintaining their health or the health of the pregnancy. the definition also includes when
the employee is seeking health care related to pregnancy, childbirth, or a related medical condition itself.
pregnancy and childbirth, for purposes of this policy, include, but are not limited to, current pregnancy; past
pregnancy; potential or intended pregnancy; labor; and childbirth (including vaginal and cesarean delivery).
related medical conditions, for purposes of this policy, are medical conditions which relate to, are affected
by, or arise out of pregnancy or childbirth, as applied to the specific employee or applicant in question,
including, but not limited to, termination of pregnancy; infertility; fertility treatment; ectopic pregnancy;
preterm labor; pelvic prolapse; nerve injuries; cesarean or perineal wound infection; maternal cardiometabolic
disease; gestational diabetes; preeclampsia; hellp (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes and low platelets)
syndrome; hyperemesis gravidarum; anemia; endometriosis; sciatica; lumbar lordosis; carpal tunnel
syndrome; chronic migraines; dehydration; hemorrhoids; nausea or vomiting; edema of the legs, ankles, feet,
or fingers; high blood pressure; infection; antenatal (during pregnancy) or postpartum anxiety, depression, or
psychosis; frequent urination; incontinence; loss of balance; vision changes; varicose veins; changes in
hormone levels; vaginal bleeding; menstrual cycles; use of birth control; and lactation and conditions related
to lactation, such as low milk supply, engorgement, plugged ducts, mastitis, or fungal infections.
undue hardship shall mean an action requiring significant difficulty or expense by the university.
gov - hrm-5008.3 non-discrimination
the university of richmond prohibits discrimination and harassment against applicants, students, faculty or
staff on the basis of current, potential, or past pregnancy, lactation, childbirth, or related conditions. for
information on how to report such discrimination and how the university will respond to such discrimination,
please see the policy prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination – faculty and staff.
gov – hrm-5008.4 reasonable accommodations
the university will provide reasonable accommodations to employees who have limitations related to
pregnancy, lactation, childbirth, or related conditions unless the accommodation creates an undue hardship to
the university.
reasonable accommodations may include modifications to the application process, the work environment, or
the manner and circumstances under which the position is performed that would allow the employee with a
known limitation to perform the essential functions of that position.

hrm-5008 – policy on pregnancy, childbirth, lactation, and related
conditions – faculty and staff
university of richmond | 3
employees seeking an accommodation should reach out to human resources. in some cases, additional
documentation from a health care provider may be requested.
gov – hrm-5008.5 lactation space and break time
the university will provide a private space for employees to express milk. in order to determine the space
available for such use, employees should speak with human resources.
employees may use break room refrigerators for the storage of milk, but any milk should be labeled with the
name of the employee and should not be left in the refrigerator for more than 24 hours. employees storing
milk in the refrigerator assume all responsibility for the safety of the milk and the risk of harm for any reason,
including improper storage, refrigeration, and tampering.
the university provides a break time to accommodate an employee's need to express milk. an employee may
request lactation breaks by speaking with human resources.
the requested break time should, if possible, be taken concurrently with other scheduled break periods.
gov – hrm-5008.6 confidentiality
all information obtained by the university concerning medical conditions or history of employees, including
genetic information, is maintained in separate files and treated as confidential records that are disclosed only
as permitted by law. hr representatives and supervisors who have knowledge of employees' medical
information are prohibited from sharing such information unless others need to be informed to fulfill the
purposes of this policy or the operations of the university.
gov – hrm-5008.7 anti-retaliation
the university prohibits retaliation or retribution, in any form, against an individual who has requested or
used an accommodation for pregnancy, childbirth, or related conditions. the university also prohibits
retaliation or retribution, in any form, against an individual who reports in good faith, an actual, potential, or
suspected violation of this policy. see the policy prohibiting retaliation
.
related policies:
gov-3107 interim policy on prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination – faculty and staff
gov-1004 policy prohibiting retaliation
policy background:
this policy was created in 2024 to remain in compliance with state and federal laws regarding discrimination
on the basis of pregnancy, childbirth, and related conditions, including the virginia human rights act, the
pregnant workers fairness act, the pump for nursing mothers act, and title vii of the civil rights act of
1964.