university of richmond | 1
purpose:
this policy is designed to foster compliance with title ix of the education amendments of 1972 (title ix),
other applicable laws, and the university of richmond's prohibition against sexual harassment, including
sexual misconduct (as defined in this policy). this policy sets forth the university's grievance procedures for
the prompt and equitable resolution of complaints of sexual harassment, including the requirements for
reporting information that may reasonably constitute sexual harassment/sexual misconduct, and the
university's process for responding to reports and complaints alleging sexual harassment/sexual misconduct.
as a recipient of federal funds, the university of richmond complies with title ix which provides: "no person in
the united states shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied benefits of, or be
subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving federal financial assistance."
this policy and related university policies and procedures are not contracts and do not confer contractual rights
upon any individual. the university has the right to amend or modify this policy and related university policies
and procedures from time to time, without prior notice. additionally, this policy and related university policies
and procedures are not intended to replicate or supersede local, state, or federal criminal or civil laws. university
policies differ from the criminal and civil justice system and a finding of responsibility for conduct prohibited by
this policy shall not be construed as a finding that any criminal or civil statute has been violated.
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and its education program or activity (as defined herein). this
policy sets forth the process for handling complaints of sexual harassment/sexual misconduct. for information on
the university's procedures for responding to sex discrimination, other than sexual harassment and sexual
misconduct see the related policies listed at the end of this policy.
policy #: gov-3103
policy title: policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual
harassment / sexual misconduct - students
effective: 07/01/2025 responsible office: compliance, title ix and non-discrimination
date
approved:
06/17/2025 approval: director of compliance & title ix coordinator
and vice president & general counsel
replaces
policy dated:
12/16/2024 responsible
university official:
director of compliance & title ix coordinator
university of richmond
policy manual

university of richmond | 2
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
1. individuals covered
this policy applies to all students, faculty, and staff of the university.
this policy and the processes described herein are the same for all complainants and respondents
regardless of gender, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression. this policy and the processes
described herein will be implemented without regard to an individual's nationality or immigration
status. the university, including the university police department, title ix coordinators, and title ix
investigators, will not inquire into an individual's immigration status when responding to a report of
possible sexual harassment/sexual misconduct.
2. locations covered for sexual harassment/sexual misconduct
the policy shall apply to conduct that occurs on the campus of the university, on or in off-campus
buildings or property of the university, and at university sponsored activities (including off-campus
education programs and activities), or on public property. the university will also address conduct that
creates or may create a hostile environment under its education program or activity even when some
of the conduct alleged to be contributing to the hostile environment occurs outside the university's
education program or activity or outside the united states.
index:
3103.1 ............... policy
3103.2 ............... definitions
3103.3 ............... roles and responsibilities
3103.4 ............... reporting sexual harassment/sexual misconduct
3103.5 ............... immediate actions, help, and resources
3103.6 ............... initial process for addressing notice or a formal compliant of sexual harassment/sexual
misconduct
3103.7 ............... investigation, formal and alternative resolution process for complaints of sexual
harassment/sexual misconduct
policy statement:
gov- 3103.1 – policy
the university of richmond prohibits discrimination against applicants, students, faculty, or staff on the basis
of race, color, religion, national or ethnic origin, ethnicity, age, sex, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity,
gender expression, disability, military or veteran status, or any classification protected by local, state, or federal
law.
1
this prohibition includes all sexual harassment/sexual misconduct occurring in any education program or
activity operated by the university in the united states, in compliance with title ix and its implementing
1 the statement set forth in this paragraph may not be altered or amended without the approval of the university of richmond board of
trustees.

university of richmond | 3
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
regulations.
as described in this policy, the university shall make reasonable efforts to investigate and appropriately
address reports of sexual harassment/sexual misconduct. when the university has knowledge of conduct
that may reasonably constitute sexual harassment/sexual misconduct, the university will take prompt and
effective steps reasonably calculated to end such harassment or misconduct, eliminate any hostile
environment or its effects, and prevent its recurrence.
for questions about this policy, including the application of title ix and its implementing regulations, please
contact the university's director of compliance and title ix coordinator, kristine henderson, fountain hall,
suite 101, (804) 289- 8186, khender3@richmond.edu.
further information about the application of title ix
and its implementing regulations is available from the assistant secretary for civil rights, u.s. department of
education, office of civil rights, 400 maryland avenue, sw, washington, dc, 20202-1100; 800-421-3481;
ocr@ed.gov; or http://www.ed.gov/ocr.
gov-3103.2 – definitions
a. campus. the term "campus" includes any building or property owned or controlled by the university
within the same reasonably contiguous geographic area of the university and used by the university in
direct support of, or in a manner related to, its educational purposes, including residence halls and
apartments and any building or property within or reasonably contiguous to the campus that is owned
by the university, is frequently used by students, and supports university purposes.
b. complainant. the term "complainant" as used in this policy refers to the individual who is alleged to
be the victim of conduct that may constitute sexual harassment / sexual misconduct or retaliation.
the complainant may or may not be the individual who makes the report of sexual
harassment/sexual misconduct. a complainant can be a person of any gender, sexual orientation,
gender identity or gender expression. a complainant need not be a university student, faculty, or staff
member, but the administrative response and investigation described in this policy will apply only if
the respondent is a university student, staff, or faculty member.
c. confidential resource. the term "confidential resource" means a university employee: (a) whose
communications are privileged and confidential under federal or state law and who received
information in the scope of their duties to which the privilege applies; or (b) designated by the
university to provide services to persons relating to sexual harassment/sexual misconduct who
receives information while providing such services. a list and contact information for the university's
confidential resources is available here.
d. consent. the term "consent" means clear and unambiguous agreement to engage in sexual activity as
evidenced by words or actions that demonstrate a knowing and voluntary willingness to engage in
mutually agreed upon sexual activity. consent cannot be gained by force, duress, intimidation,
coercion, ignoring objections, or taking advantage of another's incapacitation. consent cannot be
inferred from silence or any other lack of active resistance. consent cannot be inferred from the way a
person is dressed. consent cannot be assumed from the fact of spending money on another person
(e.g., buying a meal on a date).
prior consent does not imply consent to future sexual acts. a current or prior consensual dating or
sexual relationship, alone, does not imply consent to sexual activity or preclude a finding of sexual
misconduct. in addition, consent to one type of sexual act does not automatically imply consent to any
other type of sexual act.

university of richmond | 4
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
consent may be withdrawn at any time through clear words or actions such as walking or running
away, pushing the other party away, or attempting to physically stop the other party. once a person
withdraws consent, sexual activity must stop, regardless of the extent or nature of the sexual behavior
that has occurred up to the moment that consent is withdrawn. for example, if one individual clearly
says "no" and the other continues penetration or another form of sexual contact, it is sexual
misconduct.
consent cannot be given by the following persons:
o individuals who are mentally incapacitated at the time of the sexual contact in a manner that
prevents them from understanding the nature or consequences of the sexual act involved,
including incapacitation as a result of alcohol or drug use;
o individuals who are asleep, unconscious or otherwise physically helpless; and
o minors.
the following definitions are applicable to determining whether consent has been given:
1. incapacitation. incapacitation is defined as the physical and/or mental inability to make informed,
rational judgments that prevents an individual from giving valid consent. incapacitation may be caused
by a permanent or temporary physical or mental impairment. incapacitation may also result from the
consumption of alcohol or the use of drugs.
the use of alcohol or drugs may, but does not automatically, affect a person's ability to consent to
sexual contact. the consumption of alcohol or drugs may result in incapacitation if the nature and
degree of the intoxication go beyond the stage of drunkenness, intoxication, or reduced inhibition to
the point where the individual is unable to make knowing, informed decisions or to understand the
nature and consequences of the sexual act. in such case, the person cannot consent to sexual activity,
regardless of their words or actions.
a person violates this policy if they have sexual contact with someone they know or should
know is incapacitated or has reached the degree of intoxication that results in incapacitation.
the test of whether an individual should know about another's incapacitation is whether a
reasonable, sober person would know about the incapacitation. a respondent cannot rebut a
sexual misconduct charge merely by arguing that they were drunk or otherwise impaired and,
as a result did not know that the other person was incapacitated.
a person who is passed out or unconscious is incapacitated and, therefore, is not able to consent.
2. coercion. coercion is unreasonable, inappropriate pressure to engage in sexual activity. coercive
behavior is different than romantic or seductive behavior because coercive behavior involves
inappropriate or unreasonable pressure to obtain consent from another person for sexual activity.
continued pressure to engage in sexual activity after the other person makes it clear that they do not want
to engage in, want to stop, or do not want to go further with sexual activity can be coercion.
3. physical force. physically restraining a person against their will, using violence or the threat of violence,
or using a weapon or threatening to use a weapon constitutes physical force. an example of physical
force includes using bodyweight to hold someone in place.
4. threats. threats cause a person to do something that they would not have done without the threat. examples
of threats include, but are not limited to:

university of richmond | 5
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
• "if you do not have sex with me, i will harm someone close to you."
• "if you do not do what i want, i will tell people that you are gay."
• "if you do not hook up with me, i will tell people you are a whore."
• "if you stop hooking up with me, i will kill myself."
5. intimidation. intimidation is defined as an implied threat. examples of intimidation include use of body
size to block an exit, breaking or smashing items, or using looks or gestures to create fear.
e. education program or activity. the phrase "education program or activity" means all of the
operations of the university. for purposes of this policy, conduct that occurs under the university's
education program or activity includes but is not limited to conduct that occurs at locations, during
events or under circumstances over which the university exercised substantial control over both the
respondent and the context in which the conduct took place. it also includes a building owned or
controlled by a recognized student organization and conduct that is subject to the university's
standards of student conduct. the university will address conduct that creates or may create a
hostile environment under its education program or activity even when some of the conduct alleged
to be contributing to the hostile environment occurs outside the university's education program or
activity or outside the united states.
f. formal complaint. the term "formal complaint" means a document filed by a complainant or
signed by the title ix coordinator alleging sexual harassment/sexual misconduct against a
respondent and requesting that the university investigate the allegations of sexual misconduct.
g. hostile environment. a "hostile environment" means unwelcome conduct based on sex that, based
on the totality of the circumstances, is subjectively and objectively offensive and is so severe and/or
pervasive that it limits or denies a person's ability to participate in or benefit from the university's
education program or activity.
h. hostile environment harassment. the term "hostile environment harassment" means unwelcome
conduct on the basis of sex that, based on the totality of the circumstances, is subjectively and
objectively offensive and is so severe and/or pervasive that it limits or denies a person's equal access
to participate in or benefit from the university's education program or activity. determining whether
a hostile environment has been created is a fact-specific inquiry.
i. off-campus buildings or property of the university. the term "off-campus buildings or property
of the university" includes any building or property owned or controlled by the university or a
student organization officially recognized by the university, that is used in direct support of, or in
relation to, the university's educational purposes, and frequently used by students.
j. public property. the term "public property" includes streets, sidewalks, or parking facilities within
the campus or immediately adjacent to and accessible from campus.
k. quid pro quo harassment. "quid pro quo harassment" occurs when a faculty or staff member of the
university, an authorized agent of the university or another person authorized by the university to provide
aid, benefit or services under the university's education program or activity, explicitly or impliedly
conditions a provision of such aid, benefit or service on an individual's participation in unwelcome sexual
conduct.
l. respondent. the term "respondent" as used in this policy refers to the individual who has been
alleged to have been engaged in conduct that may constitute sexual harassment / sexual misconduct.

university of richmond | 6
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
a respondent can be a person of any gender, sexual orientation, gender identity or gender expression.
m. responsible employees. the term "responsible employee" means an employee of the university who is
not a confidential resource and who has the authority to institute corrective measures or take action to
redress alleged sexual harassment, including sexual misconduct and sexual violence, who has been given
the duty of reporting acts of sexual harassment and sexual misconduct, to the title ix coordinators, has
responsibility for administrative leadership, teaching, or advising, or is a person whom a student could
reasonably believe has the authority to take action. a list of university employees designated as responsible
employees is available here
.
n. retaliation. the term "retaliation" means intimidation, threats, coercion, or discrimination against
any individual by the university, a university student, faculty, or staff member, or anyone else
authorized by the university to provide aid, benefit, or service under the university's education
program or activity, for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege secured by title ix or
this policy or because the individual has made a report or formal complaint, testified, assisted, or
participated or refused to participate in any manner in any investigation or formal resolution process.
o. sexual harassment. the term "sexual harassment" means conduct on the basis of sex, sex stereotypes, sex
characteristics, pregnancy or related conditions, sexual orientation, gender identity, or gender expression that
constitutes quid pro quo harassment, hostile environment harassment, or sexual misconduct, all as
defined in this policy.
p.
sexual misconduct. the term "sexual misconduct" means dating violence, domestic violence, non-
consensual sexual contact, non-consensual sexual intercourse, sexual assault, incest, and stalking as
defined in this policy.
1. dating violence the term "dating violence" means violence, including sexual or physical
abuse, or the threat of such abuse committed by a person who is or has been in a social
relationship of a romantic or intimate nature with the complainant. the existence of such a
relationship will be determined based on the reporting party's statement and with
consideration of the length of the relationship, the type of relationship, and the frequency of
interaction between the individuals involved in the relationship. dating violence does not
include conduct that falls within the definition of domestic violence.
2. domestic violence. the term "domestic violence" means conduct that would constitute a
felony or misdemeanor crime of violence under virginia law committed by: (a) a current or
former spouse or intimate partner of the complainant under the family or domestic violence
laws of virginia; (b) a person with whom the complainant shares a child in common; (c) a
person who is cohabitating or has cohabitated with the complainant as a spouse or intimate
partner; (d) a person similarly situated to a spouse of the complainant under the domestic or
family violence laws of virginia; or (e) any other person against an adult or youth who is
protected from that person's acts under the domestic or family violence laws of virginia.
3. incest. the term "incest" means nonforcible sexual intercourse between persons who are related
to each other within the degrees wherein marriage is prohibited by applicable state law.
4. non-consensual sexual contact. the term "non-consensual sexual contact: means any sexual
contact that occurs without consent. sexual contact means physical contact committed with the
intent to sexually molest, arouse or gratify any person, where one person intentionally touches
another's intimate parts or clothing directly covering such intimate parts or causes a person to

university of richmond | 7
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
touch their own intimate parts or clothing directly covering such intimate parts. examples of
sexual contact include, but are not limited to, the intentional touching of a person's genitalia,
groin, breast, or buttocks or the clothing covering any of those areas, or using force to cause the
person to touch their own genitalia, groin, breast, or buttocks. non-consensual sexual contact
may also be referenced as criminal sexual contact..
5. non-consensual sexual intercourse. the term "non-consensual sexual intercourse" means any
act of sexual intercourse that occurs without consent. sexual intercourse is defined by
penetration (anal, oral, or vaginal), however slight, by a penis, tongue, finger, or inanimate
object. non-consensual sexual intercourse may also be referred to as rape.
6. sexual assault. the term "sexual assault" means non- consensual sexual contact, non-consensual
sexual intercourse, and incest. it also includes an offense classified as a forcible or nonforcible sex
offense under the uniform crime reporting system of the federal bureau of investigation.
7. stalking. the term "stalking" means engaging in a course of conduct directed at a specific person
(including surveillance, repeated phone calls, emails, text messages, social media messages, use of
other technology or in-person contact) that would cause a reasonable person to fear for their own
safety or the safety of others or to suffer substantial emotional distress. any act that constitutes
stalking under virginia law is also prohibited under this policy.
a. course of conduct. a course of conduct means two or more acts, including, but not limited to,
acts in which the person directly, indirectly, or through third parties, by any action, method,
device, or means, follows, monitors, observes, surveils, threatens, or communicates to or about,
another person, or interferes with another person's property.
b. substantial emotional distress. substantial emotional distress means significant mental
suffering or anguish that may, but does not necessarily, require medical or other professional
treatment or counseling.
q. sexual violence. the term "sexual violence" means any physical sexual act or acts perpetrated against a
person's will or against a person incapable of giving consent. examples of sexual violence include non-
consensual sexual contact, non-consensual sexual intercourse, and sexual assault.
r. student. the term "student" includes all persons who have gained admission to the university and all
persons taking courses at the university, either full-time or part-time, pursuing undergraduate, graduate, or
professional studies.
s. supportive measures. the term "supportive measures" means individualized measures offered as
appropriate and as reasonably available to a complainant, respondent, or witness, without fee or charge,
designed to: (1) restore or preserve the individual's equal access to the university's education programs and
activity or to protect the safety of the individuals or the campus community; or (2) provide support during an
investigation, formal resolution process, or alternative resolution process under this policy. supportive
measures are non-disciplinary and non-punitive and should not unreasonably burden the other party.
t. title ix coordinator. the term "title ix coordinator" refers to the university's title ix coordinator, its
deputy title ix coordinators, and/or any designees appointed by the title ix coordinator or deputy title
ix coordinator(s).
gov-3103.3 – roles and responsibilities
a. the title ix coordinator
the university's title ix coordinators are responsible for ensuring the university's compliance with title

university of richmond | 8
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
ix. this policy sets forth the obligations of the appropriate title ix coordinator upon receipt of
information that may reasonably constitute sexual harassment or sexual misconduct, or a formal
complaint.
for more information on the role of title ix coordinators at the university, see the university's title
ix coordinators policy.
b. the university of richmond police department
the university of richmond police department (urpd) is a full-service law enforcement agency
accredited by the commission on accreditation for law enforcement agencies and the international
association of campus law enforcement administrators.
urpd responds to all reports of criminal activity occurring on campus including incidents of sexual
assault, domestic violence, stalking, and dating violence. urpd enforces virginia law and will
coordinate certain investigations with the commonwealth attorney. in response to a call for service,
urpd will dispatch an officer to assist the victim with filing an incident report. urpd notifies the
university's title ix coordinators of any report of sexual misconduct. the detectives from the urpd
will investigate a report of criminal sexual misconduct occurring on the university's campus or will
assist students in reporting to other law enforcement agencies if the misconduct occurs off campus.
urpd is the designated reporter under the jeanne clery disclosure of campus security policy
("clery act") and campus crime statistics act for the university of richmond, issues timely
warnings, and maintains the university's crime log.
c. the college deans' offices and deans of students
the university college deans' offices and, the deans or directors responsible for student affairs in the
law school, school of professional and continuing studies, and the mba program are important
sources of information, support, and guidance to students involved in a sexual misconduct proceeding.
they do not conduct investigations or the formal resolution process, but they do provide individuals
with information on the university's policies and procedures, connect individuals with the title ix
coordinators and urpd, and assist the title ix coordinator with the implementation of supportive
measures including academic accommodations to students.
the staff of the college dean's offices and the deans or directors responsible for student affairs in the law
school, school of professional and continuing studies, and the mba and ms in management program
are responsible employees, and, as a result, will promptly notify the title ix coordinator of any report
of sexual misconduct they receive.
d. human resources office
the university's human resources office serves as an important source of information, support, and
guidance to employees involved in a formal complaint or an alternative or formal resolution process
under this policy. under certain circumstances, this office plays a crucial role in investigating allegations
of sexual harassment/sexual misconduct involving faculty and staff in accordance with the university's
policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment/sexual misconduct- faculty and staff.
geraldine sullivan, chief human resource officer and deputy title ix coordinator for employees can
be reached at (804) 289-8747.
gov-3103.4 – reporting sexual harassment / sexual misconduct
a. required reporting. all responsible employees are required to notify the title ix coordinator when the

university of richmond | 9
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
responsible employee has information about conduct that may reasonably constitute sexual
harassment/sexual misconduct. additionally, the university strongly encourages all members of the campus
community to promptly report potential sexual harassment/sexual misconduct.
b. how to report. information that may reasonably constitute sexual harassment /sexual misconduct
should be reported as follows:
• students: for matters involving students as the subject of and the person engaging in the
alleged sexual harassment/sexual misconduct, contact tracy cassalia, deputy title ix and
non-discrimination coordinator, at (804) 289-8464, tcassali@richmond.edu. for matters
involving a student and a faculty or staff member as either the subject of or the person
engaging in alleged sexual harassment/sexual misconduct, contact tracy cassalia, as noted
above, and she will coordinate with the chief human resources officer and deputy title ix
coordinator for employees.
• faculty and staff: for matters involving faculty or staff as the subject of and person engaging in
alleged sexual harassment/sexual misconduct, contact geraldine sullivan, chief human
resources officer and deputy title ix coordinator for employees at (804) 289-8166,
geraldine.sullivan@richmond.edu
information may also be provided to kristine henderson, director of compliance and title ix
coordinator at (804) 289-8186, khender3@richmond.edu.
while the university encourages people to report concerns regarding alleged sexual harassment/
sexual misconduct directly to the individuals listed above, reports may also be made via the
university's ethics and compliance helpline or the online report
form.
c. reporting to urpd. all members of the university community are encouraged to report sexual misconduct
that may constitute a crime to the urpd. reports to urpd can be made by calling 8911 (from a campus
phone) or (804) 289-8911.members of the campus community may also contact eric beatty, major,
university police at 804-289-8723, for general information about reporting options and the university's
policies and procedures.
a complainant may speak with a urpd detective before deciding whether to file a police report. a
complainant may file a report with urpd even if they have not decided whether to pursue a criminal
investigation. reporting an incident is a separate step from choosing to pursue a criminal investigation
and prosecution. a complainant who files a report with urpd, or another local law enforcement
agency, is not required to continue with criminal proceedings.
the criminal investigation is independent from any investigation undertaken by the title ix coordinators
under this policy. however, urpd and the title ix coordinators will collaborate to the extent possible and
will seek to avoid unnecessary burdens on the parties.
d. reporting will not result in a conduct charge for alcohol or drugs
if a case involves underage drinking or use of other illicit substances, the university will not pursue a
conduct or disciplinary charge for a violation of the
university's alcohol, tobacco & other drug
policy against the individual rendering assistance to someone who may have experienced sexual
harassment/sexual misconduct, individuals reporting possible sexual harassment/sexual misconduct,
the complainant, the witnesses, and other individuals participating in an investigation or hearing.

university of richmond | 10
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
gov-3103.5 –immediate actions, help, and resources
a. immediate actions
any individual who has experienced sexual harassment/sexual misconduct that may constitute a crime, is
encouraged to do the following as promptly as possible, in order to preserve evidence that may assist in
proving that the alleged offense occurred or may be helpful in obtaining a protective order:
o get to a safe place as soon as possible.
o try to preserve all physical evidence. do not wash clothes or use the toilet. put all clothing you
were wearing at the time of the incident in a paper bag, not in a plastic bag. all physical
evidence should be provided to police as soon as possible.
o contact urpd by calling 8911 (from a campus phone) or (804) 289-8911. urpd can
assist in contacting other local law enforcement agencies for incidents occurring off
campus. on campus, a blue light emergency phone will connect callers directly to the
urpd dispatcher.
o get medical attention as soon as possible. urpd can provide transportation to the hospital if
needed. a medical examination will provide any necessary treatment and collect important
evidence. injuries may not be immediately apparent. the student health center can assist
with injuries, preventative treatment for sexually transmitted diseases, and other health
services.
 it is important to seek immediate and follow-up medical attention for several reasons:
• to assess and treat any physical injuries that may have sustained.
• to determine the risk of sexually transmitted diseases or pregnancy and take
appropriate medical measures.
• to gather evidence that may aid criminal prosecution.
o a special hospital exam (perk: physical evidence recovery kit) should be performed by
an emergency department. university students can receive the exam at st. mary's hospital
or through the virginia commonwealth university health system.
 the hospital emergency departments follow national standards for survivor care,
sexual assault exams, and evidence collection procedures.
 anyone concerned about anonymity or having their parents being notified, can speak with
hospital personnel regarding options for confidentiality. inform the triage nurse of this
request for anonymity upon arrival to an emergency room. there are many resources
available to individuals that may assist with perk exam costs, and medical personnel will
provide more information. at the hospital, individuals may choose to undergo a perk exam
even if they are unsure whether they want to report the sexual misconduct to the police and
want time to think about it. hospital nurses will collect the evidence without revealing the
identity of the individual to the authorities. the evidence will be held for at least two years
before being discarded. the individual must contact the storage facility in writing for an
extension beyond that point.
b. counseling and emotional support resources
1. on-campus resources
o caps. counselors at the university's counseling and psychological services ("caps") are
available to assist in a crisis and to provide information about options, including medical

university of richmond | 11
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
assistance, psychological counseling, university disciplinary procedures, and legal
prosecution. caps counselors can be reached at (804) 289-8119 during regular office hours.
the caps staff also maintains an on-call schedule for emergencies and may be reached
through the university police dispatcher at (804) 289-8715.
counselors at caps can provide safe, confidential support during this difficult period. they
can inform you of common reactions to crisis situations and discuss coping methods that may
assist you immediately following the misconduct and later. talking about your concerns with
one of these counselors may help you sort through feelings and decide what to do. you do not
need to disclose your name if you call caps for information. counselors will not reveal your
identity to anyone without your permission. all caps counselors are affirming spaces and
title ix-trained. this resource is available for students only.
o c.a.r.e advocate. the c.a.r.e advocate (advocate) is a confidential resource to students that have
experienced, or are experiencin g, sexual misconduct. the advocate can assist students in
understanding reporting options and navigating the reporting process, provide accompaniment to
medical and legal services as requested, and aid with crisis intervention. the advocate can be
reached at (804) 801-6251 or advocate@richmond.edu. this resource is available for students only.
o student health center. the student health center provides evaluation and treatment for illnesses
and injuries, assistance in managing chronic disease and offers comprehensive program in health
education and health maintenance. our staff of board-certified physicians, nurse practitioners,
registered nurses, and certified medical assistants are experienced in the care of young adults.
o chaplaincy. members of the university community seeking pastoral care and support may
contact the office of the chaplaincy at (804) 289-8500. reports to ordained members of
the chaplaincy are confidential.
o employee assistance program. all employees have access to the university's employee
assistance program (eap) offered through the university's insurance provider, cigna.
the eap provides personal advocates who will work with employees and their household
family members to help resolve issues they may be facing, connect them with mental
health professionals, and direct them to a variety of helpful resources in the community.
eap can be reached 24 hours a day, seven days a week at 1-877-622-4327 or by logging
onto the mycigna website using the employer id 'richmond'. this resource is available to
employees only.
o onsite behavioral health counselor. the behavioral health counselor will assist
employees in an environment to support and foster personal well-being. the behavioral
health counselor will also help employees' access eap services. confidential
appointments are available on wednesdays from 10:00 am – 2:00 pm. the onsite
behavioral health counselor can be reached at 804-240-8628.
o urpd victim/witness services. the university of richmond victim/witness assistance
program is operated out of the university police department, which is located on the
ground floor of the special programs building, and may be contacted by calling (804)
289-8715, 24 hours a day, seven days a week. university of richmond detectives serve
as liaisons between the city of richmond and the county of henrico courts systems.
detectives assist victims to obtain services to include counseling and psychological
support, guidance to area resources, and assistance through the court process. this
resource is available to students and employees.

university of richmond | 12
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
2. off-campus resources
o greater richmond regional hotline. the greater richmond regional hotline, available at
(804) 612-6126, is a crisis response system for people across the region impacted or affected
by domestic, intimate partner, and/or sexual violence. this resource is available to students
and employees.
calling the hotline will connect callers to a local specialist who can offer support and
information about resources and experts in the richmond area. the hotline is available 24
hours per day, seven days a week and is open to survivors and supporters. the ywca, safe
harbor, and other area organizations, sponsor the hotline.
o safe harbor. safe harbor supports those who are experiencing or have experienced domestic
and/or sexual violence. safe harbor offers comprehensive services for survivors of sexual
and/or intimate partner violence including: a 24-hour helpline at (804) 612-6126,
children/youth services, community education and training, counseling, court advocacy,
emergency shelter, and hospital accompaniment. this resource is available to students and
employees.
o virginia anti-violence project. the virginia anti-violence project offers support for
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and questioning survivors of sexual assault and/or
intimate partner violence as well as hate-motivated violence. virginia's 24/7 lgbtq+
helpline can be reached by calling 1-866-356-6998. this resource is available to students
and employees.
c. other available resources
1. transportation
the university police are always available to transport victims of sexual misconduct to the
hospital. to ask for transportation, call the university police dispatcher at (804) 289-8715 and ask
for immediate assistance. members of the university richmond police department are considered
responsible employees and have an obligation to report information regarding sexual misconduct
to the title ix coordinator.
2. non-emergency medical procedures
even if someone chooses not to have a hospital exam, it is still important to get medical
attention. an exam, in these instances, will include treatment of any physical problems and lab
tests for sexually transmitted diseases and/or pregnancy. any non-emergency treatment can be
arranged on campus by calling the student health center
at (804) 289-8064 and making an
appointment. students and employees may seek medical services after hours and on weekends at
st. mary's hospital and other local hospitals.
3. other resources. students may contact the title ix coordinator to discuss resources for legal
assistance, visa and immigration assistance, student financial aid.

university of richmond | 13
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
gov-3103.6 – initial process for addressing notice or a formal complaint of sexual harassment/sexual
misconduct
a. formal complaints of sexual harassment or sexual misconduct.
1. formal complaints by members of the campus community. a formal complaint may be filed with the
title ix coordinator in person, by mail, or by electronic mail, and must contain the complainant's
physical or digital signature.
2. formal complaints by the title ix coordinator. under certain circumstances, the title ix coordinator
may file a formal complaint even if the complaint has elected not to do so. in those circumstances, the
title ix coordinator will seek to balance a complainant's request for confidentiality with the need to
protect students and the campus community. factors considered by the title ix coordinator will include
the following:
o the seriousness of the alleged sexual harassment/sexual misconduct;
o circumstances indicating increased risk of additional acts by the respondent;
o the complainant's reasonable safety concerns regarding the initiation of a complaint;
o the basis for the complainant's request not to proceed;
o prior complaints against the respondent;
o any history of the respondent's arrests;
o threats from the respondent;
o the involvement of multiple alleged perpetrators;
o any pattern of perpetration via drugs or alcohol at a given location or by a given group;
o the age of complainant; and
o the ability of the university to gather relevant evidence.
the title ix coordinator may consult with the sexual misconduct review subcommittee and
other university officials when considering these factors.
if the title ix coordinator determines that the alleged conduct presents an imminent and serious
threat to the health or safety of the complainant or another individual, or that the alleged conduct
prevents the university from ensuring equal access on the basis of sex to is education program or
activity, the title ix coordinator may initiate the formal complaint.
if the title ix coordinator decides to initiate a complaint under this subsection, the title ix coordinator
will notify the complainant in advance and will use reasonable efforts to address reasonable concerns
about the complainant's privacy, safety, or the safety of others, including by providing supportive
measures.
b. initial response
the title ix coordinator will respond to reports of sexual harassment/sexual misconduct, regardless
of whether the report is made directly by the complainant, by another student, faculty member, staff
member, or other third party. the title ix coordinator will respond to all formal complaints as set
forth in this policy.
1. outreach to complainant. upon receipt of a formal complaint or notice of conduct that
reasonably may constitute sexual harassment/sexual misconduct within the scope of this policy,

university of richmond | 14
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
title ix coordinator will contact the complainant if their identity is known in writing and offer to
meet with the complainant. the purpose of this meeting is to advise the complainant of their rights
and options under this policy and it is not intended to gather information as part of the investigation
of a complaint. when the title ix coordinator meets with the complainant, the title ix
coordinator will provide the following information:
• the complainant's rights under this policy and other relevant university policies;
• the university's obligation to treat both the complainant and the respondent equitably;
• the university's obligation to investigate promptly a formal complaint of sexual
harassment/sexual misconduct under this policy;
• the complainant's reporting rights, including the right to pursue or not to pursue criminal
action;
• the importance of the collection and preservation of evidence;
• the importance of seeking appropriate medical attention;
• the available options for pursuing a protective order;
• the complainant's right to participate or decline to participate in any investigation;
• that the respondent is presumed to be not responsible for the alleged conduct until a
determination regarding responsibility is made at the end of the formal resolution
process;
• that the university prohibits retaliation as described in this policy;
• the complainant's right to an advisor of their choosing and to have the advisor present at all
meetings with the title ix coordinator, the investigator and during a formal or alternative
resolution process;
• information about the formal resolution and alternative resolution processes and
university procedures for pursuing a formal complaint ;
• the availability and type of supportive measures; and
• the process for handling requests for confidentiality or requests to not move forward with a
formal complaint.
the title ix coordinator will provide the complainant time to consider their rights and options and to
determine whether the complainant wishes to move forward with the filing of a formal complaint.
2. outreach to the respondent. following receipt or initiation of a formal complaint, the title ix
coordinator will contact the respondent in writing and offer to meet with the respondent. the purpose
of this meeting is to advise the respondent of their rights and options under this policy and it is not
intended to gather information as part of the investigation of a complaint. when the title ix coordinator
meets with the respondent, the coordinator will provide the following information:
• the respondent's rights under this policy and other relevant university policies;
• the university's obligation to treat both the complainant and the respondent equitably;
• the university's obligation to investigate promptly a formal complaint of sexual
harassment/sexual misconduct under this policy;

university of richmond | 15
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
• the importance of the collection and preservation of evidence;
• the respondent's right to participate or decline to participate in any investigation;
• that the respondent is presumed to be not responsible for the alleged conduct until a
determination regarding responsibility is made at the end of the formal resolution
process;
• that the university prohibits retaliation as described in this policy;
• the respondent's right to an advisor of their choosing and to have the advisor present at all
meetings with the title ix coordinator, the investigator and during a formal or alternative
resolution process;
• information about the formal resolution and alternative resolution processes and
university procedures for pursuing a formal complaint ;
• the availability and type of supportive measures; and
• the complainant's right to pursue a criminal complaint, in addition to their rights under
this policy.
3. written notice of allegations, procedures and rights. upon initiation of a formal complaint, the title
ix coordinator shall provide written notice to the complainant and respondent, if their identities are
known, that sets forth the information listed below. this written notice shall be provided with sufficient
time for the complainant and respondent to prepare for an interview. if the title ix coordinator has
reasonable concerns for the safety of any person as a result of providing the written notice described in
this section, the title ix coordinator may reasonably delay providing the notice in order to address the
safety concerns appropriately. reasonable concerns must be based on an individualized safety and risk
analysis and not on speculation or stereotypes. if additional allegations of sexual harassment/sexual
misconduct arise in the course of an investigation, that are not included in the original formal complaint,
or a consolidated formal complaint under this policy, the title ix coordinator shall update this notice.
the content of the written notice shall include:
a. a description of the conduct alleged in the notice or complaint to constitute sexual
harassment/sexual misconduct;
b. the identities of the complainant and respondent, to the extent known;
c. the date(s) and location(s) of the conduct alleged to constitute sexual harassment/sexual
misconduct, to the extent known;
d. other sufficient information known at the time that would allow the complainant and respondent
to respond to the allegations;
e. a copy of or link to this policy and all related university policies setting forth the process for
investigation and formal and alternative resolution of the allegations or formal complaint;
f. a statement that the complainant and respondent have the right to an advisor of their choice who
may, but is not required to be an attorney, and to have the advisor present at all meetings with the
title ix coordinator or the investigator and during any formal or alternative resolution process;
g. a statement that the standards of student conduct prohibit lying to university officials, including
during an investigation or formal resolution process;
h. a statement that retaliation is prohibited under this policy and related university policies; and

university of richmond | 16
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
i. a statement that the complainant and respondent are entitled to an equal opportunity to access the
relevant and not otherwise impermissible evidence as provided in this policy.
4. notification to the university police. the title ix coordinator will notify the urpd of any report that
may be required to be included in the crime log and disclosed under the clery act. unless the
complainant wishes to make a police report, their name or other personally identifiable information
will not be included in the report to the urpd, although law enforcement members of the sexual
misconduct review subcommittee, described herein, may have access to identifying information. in
addition, the name of a complainant or respondent are never published in the university's crime log,
included in any timely warning message, or as part of the annual campus security report required by
the clery act.
whether a report comes directly from a complainant, the title ix coordinator or another source,
the urpd may determine that a serious or continuing threat possibly exists and may release either
an "emergency notification" or a "timely warning" to the campus community. emergency
notifications must be issued immediately upon confirmation of a significant emergency or
dangerous situation, and timely warnings must be issued if the crime is considered by the institution
to represent a serious or continuing threat. the name of the complainant or respondent or other
personally identifiable information will never be included in emergency notifications or timely
warnings. the title ix coordinator will attempt to notify the complainant in advance if an
emergency notification or a timely warning is going to be distributed. the title ix coordinator will
also attempt to notify the respondent, if they have been notified of the formal complaint prior to
issuance of an emergency notification or a timely warning.
5. review by the sexual misconduct review subcommittee of the threat assessment team. as
required under virginia law, the sexual misconduct review subcommittee receives reports from the
title ix coordinators regarding alleged violations of this policy. the sexual misconduct review
subcommittee is a subcommittee of the university's threat assessment team.
the membership of the sexual misconduct review subcommittee includes:
• the title ix coordinator;
• the chief or assistant chief of the university police department (or a designee who shall be
sworn police officer of the university police department);
• the vice president for student affairs (or a designee who shall be a member of the student
development division); and
• such other members of the university's threat assessment team as the title ix coordinator
deems appropriate.
the sexual misconduct review subcommittee will convene within 72 hours of receiving the report of
an incident from the title ix coordinator to review the information provided by the title ix
coordinator. the responsibilities of the sexual misconduct review subcommittee include:
• providing advice and guidance to the title ix coordinator regarding the investigation, appropriate
supportive measures, and available resources for the involved individuals; and
• determining if the disclosure of information regarding the incident, including personally
identifiable information, is necessary to protect the health or safety of the complainant or other
individuals, consistent with applicable ferpa regulations, including 34 c.f.r.§99.36, title ix
regulations, and this policy. if the subcommittee, or the representative from the, determines this

university of richmond | 17
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
disclosure is necessary, the representative from the urpd will immediately disclose the
information, including personally identifiable information about the individuals involved, to the
appropriate law enforcement agency. the title ix coordinator will notify the complainant in
advance of any disclosure that is made.
the sexual misconduct review subcommittee will have the access to law enforcement, criminal
history, education, personnel, and health records relevant to the report of sexual harassment/sexual
misconduct to the extent necessary to assess any potential risk to members of the campus community
and fulfill the subcommittee's legal responsibilities, and as permitted by applicable law.
the sexual misconduct review subcommittee when appropriate will conduct an individualized safety
and risk analysis to determine if there is an imminent and serious threat to the health or safety of a
complainant or any students, employees, or individual arising from the allegations of
harassment/sexual misconduct and consequently, emergency removal, as described in this policy, is
warranted.
after its initial meeting regarding a report, the sexual misconduct review subcommittee will
reconvene upon the request of the title ix coordinator to provide guidance regarding a pending
investigation or report or to assess and respond to potential risks or threats associated with the reported
incident.
c. supportive measures. the title ix coordinator shall offer and coordinate supportive measures for
complainants and, where appropriate, respondents and witnesses upon receipt of information about
conduct that may reasonably constitute sexual harassment/sexual misconduct.
1. types of supportive measures. the type of supportive measure(s) offered and coordinated may vary
based upon the circumstances of a specific matter and the reasonable availability of the supportive
measures. supportive measures include, but are not limited to, those listed
here.
2. purpose / no unreasonable burden. supportive measures shall be designed to: (i) protect the safety of
a complainant, respondent, witness, or the campus community; or (ii) provide support to a
complainant, respondent, or witness during an investigation, formal resolution process, or alte rnative
resolution process. supportive measures are not used for punitive or disciplinary reasons. supportive
measures should not unreasonably burden either the complainant or the respondent.
3. modification, termination, or continuation of supportive measures .
a. the title ix coordinator may modify supportive measures during or after an investigation, formal
resolution process, or alternative resolution process, consistent with subsection 2, above.
b. the title ix coordinator may continue some or all supportive measures after conclusion of an
investigation, formal resolution process or alternative resolution process as the title ix coordinator
deems reasonably appropriate.
4. confidentiality of supportive measures . the university will maintain the confidentiality o f the
supportive measures provided to a complainant, respondent, or witness unless the disclosure is
necessary to implement the supportive measure(s), to restore or preserve the complainant's or
respondent's access to the university's education program or activity, or one or more of the
exceptions to the confidentiality requirement set forth in this policy apply. the title ix coordinator
may consult with the office of disability services to ensure that any supportive measure offered is
implemented in a man ner consistent with applicable disability laws and regulations .
5. exceptions to the confidentiality requirement. the university may disclose information about

university of richmond | 18
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
supportive measures provided to a complainant or respondent in the following circumstances:
a. when the complainant or respondent, as applicable, has consented to such disclosure;
b. when reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of this policy;
c. when such disclosure is required by federal law or regulation or by a federal grant or funding
agreement, consistent with title ix, is required by state or local law, or when permitted under
ferpa or its implementing regulations.
d. emergency interim suspension and administrative leave.
1. emergency interim suspension of a student respondent. the university may suspend a student
respondent on an emergency, interim basis if after an individualized safety and risk analysis, the
sexual misconduct review subcommittee determines that an immediate threat to physical health
or safety of any student or other individual arising from the allegations of sexual
harassment/sexual misconduct justifies the emergency suspension. the title ix coordinator
will provide the respondent with written notice of the emergency interim suspension and an
opportunity to appeal the suspension immediately following decision by submitting a written
appeal to the vice president for student development.
2. administrative leave. the university may place an employee respondent on administrative leave
from employment responsibilities during the pendency of an investigation, formal resolution process, or
alternative resolutions process, consistent with other applicable university policies and handbooks.
e. consolidation of formal complaints. when the allegations of sexual harassment/sexual misconduct arise
out of the same facts or circumstances, the title ix coordinator may consolidate two or more formal
complaints of sexual harassment/sexual misconduct: (1) against the same respondent(s); (2) against
multiple respondents; or (3) when the complainant and respondent initiate formal complaints against each
other.
f. dismissal of a formal complaint
1. basis for dismissal of a formal complaint. the title ix coordinator may dismiss a formal complaint at
any time prior to a final determination under formal resolution process or an agreement under an
alternative resolution process for any of the following reasons:
a. the title ix coordinator is unable to identify the respondent after taking reasonable steps to do so;
b. the respondent is not participating in the university's education programs or activity;
c. the respondent is not employed by the university;
d. the complainant voluntarily withdraws, in writing, any or all of the allegations in the complaint, the
title ix coordinator does not initiate a complaint under this policy, and the title ix coordinator
determines that without the withdrawn allegations, the conduct described in the remaining
allegations, if any, would not constitute sexual harassment/sexual misconduct under this policy
even if proven; or
e. the title ix coordinator determines that the conduct alleged in the complaint, even if proven, would
not constitute sexual harassment/sexual misconduct under this policy, provided that the title ix
coordinator has made reasonable efforts to clarify the allegations with the complainant.
2. time frame for decision. the title ix coordinator shall make a decision as to whether to dismiss the
formal complaint within thirty (30) days of receipt of information indicating a potential basis for
dismissal as set forth in section 3103.6(f)(1) of this policy. this time frame may be extended on a

university of richmond | 19
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
reasonable, case-by-case basis for good cause. the title ix coordinator will notify the complainant and
respondent, in writing, of the extension and the reason for the extension.
3. notice to complainant and respondent. the title ix coordinator shall promptly notify the
complainant, in writing, of the dismissal of a formal complaint and the basis for such dismissal. if the
dismissal occurs after the respondent has been notified of the formal complaint, the title ix
coordinator shall notify the respondent, in writing, of the dismissal of a formal complaint and the basis
for such dismissal at the same time that the complainant is notified. such notice shall include the rights
of the complainant and respondent to file an appeal of the dismissal and the basis for such appeal as set
forth in this policy.
4. supportive measures and steps to prevent sexual harassment or sexual misconduct. if the title ix
coordinator dismissed a formal complaint, the title ix coordinator shall:
a. offer appropriate supportive measures to the complainant;
b. offer appropriate supportive measures to the respondent if the dismissal occurs after the
respondent has been notified of the formal complaint; and
c. take other appropriate, prompt, and reasonable steps designed to prevent sexual harassment/sexual
misconduct from continuing or recurring.
5. appeal of decision to dismiss formal complaint. a complainant has a right to appeal the dismissal of a
formal complaint on the grounds set forth in this policy. if the dismissal occurs after the respondent has
been notified of the formal complaint, then the respondent also has a right to appeal the dismissal of the
formal complaint on the grounds set forth in this policy.
a. grounds for appeal. the grounds for an appeal are as follows:
i. a procedural irregularity that would change the outcome of the decision to dismiss the formal
complaint;
ii. the appealing party has identified and proffered new evidence that was not reasonably available
at the time the formal complaint was initiated or the decision to dismiss was made that would
change the outcome of the decision to dismiss the formal complaint; or
iii. the title ix coordinator or the investigator had a conflict of interest or bias for or against
complainants or respondents generally or the individual complainant or respondent that would
change the outcome of the decision to dismiss the formal complaint.
b. process for appeal.
i. the complainant or the respondent may file an appeal with the vice president for student
development, or their designee, (the "appellate officer") within five (5) business days of being
notified of the title ix coordinator's decision to dismiss the formal complaint.
ii. the appeal must be in writing and must be emailed to the appellate officer, with a copy to the
title ix coordinator. the appeal must state the grounds for the appeal and may include a
statement in support of the party's appeal or a statement challenging the decision to dismiss the
formal complaint.
iii. the title ix coordinator will notify the parties, in writing, when an appeal is filed and, if the
respondent has not previously been notified of the formal complaint, the title ix coordinator
will notify the respondent of the allegations in the formal complaint.

university of richmond | 20
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
iv. the appellate officer will respond promptly to such an appeal and shall render a decision in
writing within thirty (30) days of receipt of the appeal. this time frame may be extended on a
reasonable, case-by-case basis for good cause. the appellate officer will notify the complainant
and respondent, in writing, of the extension and the reason for the extension.
v. the appellate officer will provide the complainant and the respondent with a copy of the
decision at the same time.
gov – 3103.7 - investigation, formal and alternative resolution process for complaints of sexual
harassment and sexual misconduct
a. overall requirements
1. prompt and equitable process. this policy is intended and shall be implemented in a manner that
provides a prompt and equitable resolution process for formal complaints of sexual harassment/sexual
misconduct. this policy shall be applied in a manner that treats complainants and respondents
equitably.
2. conflicts of interest. the title ix coordinator, the investigator, the appellate officer, and the decision-
maker involved in the university's formal resolution process or alternative resolution process shall not
have a conflict of interest or a bias for or against complainants or respondents generally or the
complainant or respondent involved in the complaint under investigation or adjudication.
3. presumption. in implementing this policy and any investigation, formal resolution process or alternative
resolution process, there shall be a presumption that the respondent is not responsible for the alleged
sexual harassment or sexual misconduct until a determination is made at the end of a formal resolution
process or respondent voluntarily acknowledges their responsibility as part of an alternative resolution
process.
4. privacy. the title ix coordinator, the investigator, the appellate officer and others involved in the
investigation, formal resolution process, and alternative resolution process will take reasonable steps to
protect the privacy of the complainant, the respondent and any witnesses during the process. the
commitment to privacy, however, shall not be implemented in a manner that restricts the ability of the
complainant and respondent to obtain and present evidence, including by speaking to witnesses,
consulting with family members, confidential resources, or advisors, or otherwise preparing for an
investigation, formal resolution process, or alternative resolution process.
5. objective evaluation. the investigator and the decision-maker in a formal resolution process under this
policy shall objectively evaluate all evidence that is relevant and not impermissible (as defined below),
including both inculpatory and exculpatory evidence. the investigator or the decision-maker may engage
in credibility assessments but shall not make credibility determinations based on an individual's status as
a complainant, respondent, or witness.
a. relevant evidence, testimony and questions. evidence, testimony, and questions are considered to
be relevant when they are related to the allegations of sexual harassment/sexual misconduct set
forth in a formal complaint or otherwise under investigation or subject to adjudication in a formal
resolution process. questions are relevant when they seek evidence that may aid in showing whether
the alleged sexual harassment/sexual misconduct occurred. evidence is relevant when it may aid a
decision-maker in determining whether the alleged sexual harassment/sexual misconduct occurred.
b. impermissible evidence, testimony, and questions. the investigator and the decision-maker in a
formal resolution process shall exclude and shall not consider evidence, testimony and questions that

university of richmond | 21
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
are impermissible under this policy, regardless of whether they are relevant. the following evidence,
testimony and questions are impermissible:
i. evidence or testimony or questions that seek to elicit information that is protected under a
privilege as recognized by federal or state law, unless the person to whom the privilege is owed
has voluntarily waived that privilege;
ii. evidence or testimony or questions that seek to elicit information regarding records made or
maintained by a physician, psychologist or other health care professional in connection with the
provision of treatment, unless the person to whom the privilege is owed has voluntarily waived
that confidentiality; or
iii. evidence or testimony or questions that seek to elicit information regarding the complainant's
sexual interests or prior sexual conduct, unless: (a) evidence of prior sexual conduct is offered to
provide that someone other than the respondent committed the alleged conduct; or (b) the
evidence, testimony or questions relate to specific incidents of the complainant's sexual conduct
with the respondent that is offered to provide consent to the alleged sexual harassment/sexual
misconduct. however, the fact of prior consensual sexual conduct between the complainant and
respondent does not, but itself, demonstrate or imply the complainant's consent to the alleged
conduct at issue or preclude a determination of responsibility.
b. investigation of complaints of sexual harassment or sexual misconduct
1. assignment of investigator. upon receipt of a formal complaint and provided that the complainant and
respondent have not agreed to an alternative resolution process, the title ix coordinator shall conduct
the investigation or will engage a qualified and trained designee to conduct the investigation. the
investigation will be conducted in a prompt, objective, and thorough manner.
2. burden of gathering evidence. the university shall have the burden to conduct an investigation that
gathers sufficient evidence to determine whether sexual harassment/ sexual misconduct occurred.
neither the complainant nor the respondent have such a burden.
3. opportunity to present witnesses and evidence. the investigator shall provide the complainant and the
respondent with an equal opportunity to notify the investigator of fact witnesses, expert witnesses, and
to provide inculpatory and exculpatory information to the investigator that is relevant and not
impermissible under this policy. the investigator shall contact the fact witnesses identified by the
complainant and respondent and shall interview all relevant witnesses who agree to participate in the
investigation.
4. notice of meetings. the title ix coordinator or the investigator shall provide the complainant,
respondent, and any witness with written notice of the date, time, location (if not virtual), participants
and purpose of each meeting with the investigator. such notice shall be provided with sufficient time for
the complainant, respondent, or witness to prepare to participate in the meeting.
5. advisors/other persons. the complainant and the respondent may be accompanied by the advisor of
their choice during all meetings with the investigator. the advisor may, but is not required to be, an
attorney. neither the complainant or respondent may have a person other than their advisor present
during meetings with the investigator.
6. written investigative report. the investigator shall review all evidence gathered during the investigation
and shall determine what evidence is relevant and what evidence is impermissible, regardless of its
relevance. the investigative report shall not include evidence that is either irrelevant or impermissible.
the investigative report shall include, as appendices, all relevant and permissible evidence and

university of richmond | 22
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
transcripts of interviews with the complainant, respondent and witnesses, which may be redacted to
exclude statements that are irrelevant or impermissible under this policy.
7. access and response to the investigative report and evidence.
a. access to preliminary report. the title ix coordinator shall provide both the complainant and the
respondent, and their respective advisors, with access to the preliminary investigative report and its
appendices containing relevant and permissible information.
b. other evidence. upon written request, the complainant and the respondent may inspect and review
any evidence gathered during the investigation which is not included in the preliminary investigative
report but which is directly related to the allegations in the formal complaint, including evidence
upon which the university does not intend to rely in a formal resolution process and inculpatory or
exculpatory evidence obtained by the investigator from any source.
c. response to investigative report
. the complainant and respondent will have ten (10) days from the
date that access to the preliminary investigative report and any other evidence was provided to submit
a written response to the preliminary investigative report and evidence which the investigator will
consider prior to completion of the final report. this time frame may be extended by the title ix
coordinator on a reasonable, case-by-case basis for good cause. the title ix coordinator will notify
the complainant and respondent, in writing, of the extension and the reason for the extension.
d. access to final report. the title ix coordinator shall provide both the complainant and the
respondent, and their respective advisors, with access to the final investigative report and its
appendices. access shall be provided at least ten (10) days prior to a hearing under the formal
resolution process.
8. time frame for investigation. the time frame for the investigation will generally be 60 to 120 days,
depending upon the complexity of the investigation. this time frame may be extended on a reasonable,
case-by-case basis for good cause. the title ix coordinator will notify the complainant and
respondent, in writing, of the extension and the reason for the extension.
9. coordination with pending criminal investigations
except in very unusual circumstances, the title ix investigation or formal resolution process will not
be delayed because of a pending criminal investigation. when an incident is reported to both the
university police and the title ix coordinator, they will share information to the extent possible and
as appropriate and will seek to avoid unnecessary burdens on the complainant or respondent.
in certain situations, law enforcement officials may request that the title ix coordinator temporarily
suspend an investigation or formal resolution process while law enforcement officials gather evidence
in a criminal investigation. the title ix coordinator will comply with such requests, but will
promptly resume the investigation or formal resolution process as soon as they are notified that the
law enforcement officials have completed gathering evidence. the suspension of the investigation or
formal resolution process under these circumstances will not limit the availability of supportive
measures or other assistance and support to a complainant, respondent, or witness.

university of richmond | 23
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
c. alternative resolution
1. purpose of alternative resolution. alternative resolution is a voluntary process for resolving a formal
complaint of sexual harassment/sexual misconduct and is an alternative to the formal resolution
process described in this policy. alternative resolution is not available for formal complaints alleging
that a student was subjected to sexual harassment or sexual misconduct by an employee of the
university. both the complainant and the respondent must agree, in writing, to participate in an
alternative resolution process. the alternative resolution process is designed to eliminate the
reoccurrence of the prohibited conduct and provide a remedy that meets the needs of both the
complainant and respondent while maintaining the safety of the campus community. alternative
resolution provides an opportunity for the complainant and respondent to discuss the complaint and the
alleged conduct and to communicate their feelings and perceptions regarding the conduct, the impact of
the conduct, and their wishes and expectations regarding their conduct in the future.
if a mutually agreeable resolution is reached through the alternative resolution process, the matter will be
closed and there will be no formal sanction imposed under the standards of student conduct, unless the
respondent voluntarily agrees to accept a sanction.
2. role and discretion of the title ix coordinator. the title ix coordinator may offer the complainant
and the respondent the option of pursuing an alternative resolution process at any time following the
initiation of a formal complaint and prior to a final determination as to whether sexual
harassment/sexual misconduct occurred under the formal resolution process. the title ix coordinator
is not required to offer the option of alternative resolution and shall use their discretion to determine
whether alternative resolution is appropriate under the circumstances. in making this determination, the
title ix coordinator shall consider, among other factors, whether the alleged conduct would present a
future risk of harm to others. if the title ix coordinator decides to offer the option of alternative
resolution, the title ix coordinator shall make such offer in writing.
3. options for alternative resolution. the title ix coordinator will discuss with the complainant and
respondent the options for alternative resolution, which may include, among other options, the
following:
a. a discussion between the complainant and respondent facilitated by a university administrator
approved by the title ix coordinator; or
b. mediation conducted by a neutral, third-party mediator.
the facilitator or mediator assigned to the matter shall not be the same person who conducted or would
conduct an investigation or the decision-maker in a formal resolution process.
4. notice of alternative resolution. if the complainant and respondent agree to participate in an
alternative resolution process, the title ix coordinator shall provide each party with a written notice that
contains the following:
a. the allegations at issue;
b. a description of the alternative resolution process and its requirements;
c. a statement that the complainant and respondent each have the right, at any time prior to agreeing to
a resolution, to withdraw from the alternative resolution process and initiate or continue a formal
resolution process;
d. a statement that the parties' agreement to a resolution at the conclusion of the alternative resolution
process precludes initiating or resuming a formal complaint or the formal resolution process arising
out of the same allegations;

university of richmond | 24
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
e. the potential terms that may be requested or offered in an alternative resolution agreement, including
notice that an alternative resolution agreement is binding only on the parties; and
f. that the university will maintain the confidentiality of information shared during the alternative
resolution process, to the extent permitted by law, and that such information shall not be used in a
subsequent formal resolution process.
5. advisors. the complainant and respondent have the right to the services of an advisor of their choice.
the advisor maybe an attorney.
a. advisors may attend any related meetings or proceedings with the respective parties.
b. the role of the advisor is to provide support, guidance and advice to the respective parties. the
respondent and complainant are responsible for presenting their own information. communication
will occur directly to the parties and they are responsible for communicating the information to their
advisors.
c. the complainant and respondent should select as an advisor a person whose schedule allows for
attendance at the scheduled date and time for the alternative resolution process, as delays will not
normally be allowed due to scheduling conflicts of the advisor.
d. the complainant or respondent can waive their right to have an advisor if they so choose.
6. format of alternative resolution. at the request of either party or at the discretion of the title ix
coordinator, the alternative resolution can occur in person or with technology enabling the mediator,
parties and their respective advisors to see and hear each other.
7. alternative resolution agreement. at the conclusion of the alternative resolution process, the agreement
of the parties, if any, will be documented in a formal, written resolution agreement that must be approved
by the title ix coordinator and then signed by the complainant and respondent. the alternative
resolution agreement is binding only on the complainant and respondent.
8. termination of the alternative resolution process. the university, the complainant or the respondent
may, at any time prior to the conclusion of the alternative resolution process, elect to end such
proceedings and pursue the formal resolution process instead. in such cases, statements or disclosures
made by the parties in the course of the alternative resolution may not be considered in the subsequent
formal resolution process.
d. formal resolution process. if the parties have not agreed to or have terminated an alternative resolution
process, as described in section 3103.7(c) of this policy, and if the formal complaint has not been
dismissed by the title ix coordinator pursuant to section 3103.6(f) of this policy, the formal complaint
will be adjudicated through the university's formal resolution process.
1. student as the respondent. if the respondent is a student at the university, the formal complaint will be
adjudicated under the process set forth in the university's standards of student conduct, appendix a.
2. staff member as respondent. if the respondent is a staff member of the university, the formal
complaint will be adjudicated under the process set forth in the university's policy on prohibiting and
responding to sexual harassment/sexual misconduct- staff and faculty.
3. faculty member as respondent. if the respondent is a faculty member of the university, the formal
complaint will be adjudicated under the process set forth in the university's policy on prohibiting and
responding to sexual harassment/sexual misconduct - staff and faculty and the provisions of the
faculty handbook.
4. requirements for all adjudication processes. regardless of the status of the respondent, the formal

university of richmond | 25
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
resolution process for all formal complaints of sexual harassment/sexual misconduct shall meet the
requirements set forth in this section 3103.7(d)(4) and to the extent that there is a conflict between the
requirements of this section and another university policy, handbook or the standards of student
conduct, the terms of this section shall govern.
a. the decision-maker. the decision-maker shall not be the title ix coordinator or the investigator.
b. questioning by decision-maker. the decision-maker shall have the ability to question the
complainant, the respondent, and all witnesses to adequately assess their credibility, to the extent
credibility is in dispute and relevant to evaluating one or more allegations of sexual
harassment/sexual misconduct.
c. questioning by the parties' advisors. the advisors for the complainant and respondent shall be
provided the opportunity to ask relevant questions and follow-up questions of the other party and all
witnesses, including those challenging credibility.
d. standard of proof. the decision-maker shall use the preponderance of evidence standard of proof to
determine whether sexual harassment/sexual misconduct occurred.
e. relevant and not impermissible evidence. the decision-maker shall consider only evidence and
testimony that is relevant and not impermissible, as described in this policy.
f. notice of determination and right of appeal. the decision maker shall notify the complainant and
the respondent, in writing, of the determination as to whether sexual harassment/sexual misconduct
occurred. such notice shall be provided to the complainant and respondent at the same time and
shall include the following:
i. identification of the allegations potentially constituting sexual harassment/sexual misconduct;
ii. a description of the procedural steps taken from the initiation of the formal complaint through
the determination following the hearing;
iii. the findings of fact supporting the determination of the decision-maker;
iv. conclusions regarding the application of the university's policies, including the
standards of
student conduct, to the facts;
v. a statement of and rationale for the result as to each allegation, including a determination
regarding responsibility, any sanctions imposed on the respondent, and any remedies provided to
the complainant to restore or preserve access to the university's education program and
activity; and
vi. the process and basis for filing an appeal.
g. imposition of sanctions. the university shall not impose disciplinary sanctions on a respondent
unless there is a determination following the conclusion of the formal resolution process that the
respondent engaged in conduct prohibited by this policy, or the respondent voluntarily agreed to
such sanctions as part of an alternative resolution process. additionally, the university shall not
impose any disciplinary sanction for making false statements solely on the basis of the decision-
maker's determination that sexual harassment/sexual misconduct occurred.
h. role of the title ix coordinator. if the decision-maker determines that sexual harassment/sexual
misconduct occurred, the title ix coordinator, as appropriate, shall:
i. coordinate the provision and implementation of remedies to the complainant and any other
person that the university identifies has having had equal access to the university's education

university of richmond | 26
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
program or activity limited or denied by the respondent's conduct;
ii. coordinate, in collaboration with other university officials, the imposition of sanctions against
the respondent, including the notification to the complainant of any such sanctions, to the extent
legally permissible; and
iii. take other appropriate, prompt, and effective steps intended to ensure that sexual
harassment/sexual misconduct does not continue or recur within the university's education
programs or activity.
e. confidentiality
1. obligations of the university. the university will use reasonable efforts to maintain the confidentiality
of personally identifiable information obtained in the course of responding to a formal complaint under
this policy except as permitted in this policy or permitted or required by applicable law.
2. transcript notation. virginia law requires that a prominent notation be added to the academic transcript
of any student who is suspended for, permanently separated for, or withdraws from the university while
under investigation for an offense involving sexual violence. this transcript notation will be removed if
a student is subsequently found not to have committed an offense involving sexual violence or if the
student completes their term of suspension and is determined to be in good standing according to
applicable university policy. consistent with state law and federal regulations, the notation will be
removed from a transcript after three years for a student who withdraws while under investigation or is
permanently separated from the university.
f. retaliation
1. retaliation is prohibited
the university prohibits retaliation, in any form, against an individual who reports, in good faith, an
actual, potential or suspected violation of this policy. as used in this policy, reporting "in good faith"
means the individual making the report has a reasonable basis to believe that there has been or may have
been a violation of this policy. individuals who make frivolous or false reports shall not be deemed to be
acting in good faith.
the university also prohibits retaliation, in any form, against an individual who initiates a complaint,
participated in or refused to participate in an investigation, informal or formal resolution process, served
as a witness in an investigation or hearing, or sought or initiated supportive measures under this policy.
2. response to alleged retaliation. the university will respond to information about conduct that
reasonably may constitute retaliation or to a complaint alleging retaliation in accordance with the
procedures and requirements set forth in this policy.
related policies:
gov-1004 policy prohibiting retaliation
gov- 3101 policy prohibiting discrimination
gov- 3108 policy on prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination students
gov- 3107 policy on prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination – faculty and staff
gov-3104 policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment/sexual misconduct – faculty and staff

university of richmond | 27
gov-3103 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct - students
gov-3105 title ix coordinators policy
gov-3106 policy prohibiting and responding to discrimination based on protected status- faculty and staff
gov-3102 policy prohibiting and responding to discrimination based on protected status – students
standards of student conduct
stu-1002 alcohol, tobacco & other drug policy
sec-2006 timely warning policy
acd-2003 transcript notation policy
athletics sexual misconduct prevention and education policy
faculty handbook
policy background:
this policy was revised in august 2024. at the time this policy update was finalized, there were two federal
court injunctions temporarily enjoining implementation and enforcement of title ix regulations issued by the
department of education in april 2024. as a result, the 2020 version of the title ix regulations remain
applicable to this policy. this policy was reviewed to ensure continued compliance with the 2020 regulations,
along with regulations issued under the clery act. it was also updated to incorporate certain procedures set
forth in the 2024 regulations that were not in conflict with the 2020 regulations.
this policy was updated in december 2024 to reflect an amendment to the university's non-discrimination
statement approved by the university of richmond board of trustees on december 6, 2024.
this policy was updated in september 2025 to reflect the fbi's uniform crime reporting system.
policy contacts:
director of compliance and title ix coordinator
deputy title ix and non-discrimination coordinator