university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
this policy is designed to ensure that the university of richmond complies with applicable laws and
regulations regarding political campaign activity.
scope:
this policy applies to the use of university resources and facilities by students, faculty, and staff and to the
conduct of university employees acting in an official capacity. it also applies to organizations or entities in
which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right to elect the majority of the entity's governing
board (hereinafter "affiliates").
this policy does not apply to or restrict in any way the discussion of political issues, teaching of politics or
campaign-related subjects, or academic research involving political issues, or campaigns. all students,
faculty, and staff are free to express political opinions and engage in political activities in their individual
capacities, but should avoid the appearance that they are speaking or acting on behalf of the university in
political matters.
this policy does not apply to campaigns for student government offices.
index:
gov-4001.1......definitions
gov-4001.2…..policy
policy statement:
gov-4001.1 – definitions
1. candidate: an individual who offers themselves or is proposed by others as a candidate for an elective
public office, whether a national, state, or local office. the definition includes a person who has either
declared their candidacy or is an incumbent who is seeking or is likely to seek re -election and whose
policy #: gov-4001 policy title: policy on political campaign activities on
campus
effective: 10/12/2016 responsible office: general counsel
date
approved:
10/12/2016
approval: vice president & general counsel
replaces
policy dated:
n/a responsible
university official:
vice president & general counsel

gov-4001 – policy on political campaign activities on campus
university of richmond | 2
proposed appearance is campaign-related. the appearance of an elected official will not be considered
to be campaign -related if such official will give a speech on a matter of public policy or legislation
and/or if the timing of such a ppearance is not in close proximity to an election cycle. for purposes of
this policy, the term candidate also includes campaign surrogates speaking on behalf of the candidate or
his/her campaign.
2. intervention in a political campaign: intervention in a political campaign includes, but is not limited to
publishing or distributing written or printed statements or making of oral statements on behalf or in
opposition to a candidate.
gov-4001.2 – policy
as a charitable entity exempt from taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue code, the
university is prohibited by law from participating, directly or indirectly, or intervening in political campaigns
at the federal, state, or local level. the university's facilities and resources may be used in connection with
political campaigns only as permitted by this policy.
a. permitted activities
the following activities by university students, faculty, or staff are permitted on the university's campus,
with the use of university resources, and do not require prior review (as described in section c, below).
1. non-partisan voter education and registration programs. programs that seek to educate people about
the electoral process or encourage individuals or groups to register to vote are permissible provided that
they are conducted in a non-partisan manner and are not intended to target voters of a particular political
party or help particular candidate.
2. compilation and distribution of voting records. initiatives to compile and distribute the voting records
of legislators are permissible provided that they:
o involve a wide range of topics;
o are not skewed toward a particular political position, party, or candidate;
o are presented without editorial opinion;
o do not coincide with an election period; and
o do not rate legislators or candidates for office.
3. unbiased questionnaires to candidates. circulating, tabulating and distributing the results of unbiased
questionnaires to candidates for public office is permissible provided they:
o cover a broad range of topics;
o are not skewed toward a particular political position, party, or candidate;
o are presented without editorial opinion; and
o allow reasonable time for candidates to complete.

gov-4001 – policy on political campaign activities on campus
university of richmond | 3
4. public opinion polls . conducting a public opinion poll is permissible if the questions are fair and
neutral, accepted polling techniques are used, the poll does not directly or indir ectly seek to support or
oppose a candidate for public office ( e.g., a push poll), and is conducted for academic research or as a
public service.
5. candidate interviews, editorials, and advertising in student media . recognized student newspapers,
magazines, and radio stations may, in the ordinary course of covering of public issues, interview
candidates for public office and publish political cartoons. they may also publish or broadcast editorials
endorsing a political candidate provided, that the student newspaper, magazine, or radio station clearly
issues a disclaimer that the views expressed are not those of the university. student newspapers,
magazines, and radio stations may accept paid ads from political candidates as long as such opportunity
is available to all candidates at the same rates charged to other advertisers.
6. student political organizations . recognized student political clubs and organizations ( e.g., college
republicans, college democrats) may use university facilities and resources on the same basis and with
same fees, if any, as other student organizations. student political clubs and organizations must follow
sections b& c of this policy when sponsoring candidate appearances on campus.
b. candidate appearances
the university recognizes that campus speeches and certain appearances by candidates for public office
provide unique educational opportunities for students to witness the political process first hand and to
become educated about the positions of candidate s on key issues of the day. the following types of
candidate appearances are permissible, if approved through the process described in section c , of this
policy.
1. appearances sponsored by student organizations . all recognized student political clubs and
organizations may invite candidates or campaign surrogates of their choosing to speak on campus.
recognized student political clubs and organizations will have access to university facilities for
candidate speeches on the same terms and conditions applicable to other student organizations. when
sponsoring a speech by a candidate for political office, the student political club or organization must
comply with the following, in addition to other applicable university rules and policies:
o the event cannot be a campaign rally. instead, it must be a speech or debate with opportunity for
questions and answers from the audience.
o campaign fundraising at the event is prohibited.
o the event must be open to the campus community.
o posters, social media, emails, flyers, and websites promoting the event must include a disclaimer
identifying the sponsoring student organization and stating that the university of richmond does
not endorse candidates for public office. where possible, the following language should be used:
"this event is sponsored by [name of student organization] . the use of university of richmond
facilities for this event does not constitute an endorsement by the university. the views expressed
during this event are those of the speaker and not the univers ity. the university of richmond
does not endorse or oppose candidates for public office."
o posters, social media, emails, flyers, and websites promoting the event shall not contain any
registered logo or mark of the university of richmond, including the university shield or the
spider silhouette.

gov-4001 – policy on political campaign activities on campus
university of richmond | 4
o at the beginning of the event, a representative of the student political club or organization shall
deliver the followi ng disclaimer to the audience: " this event is sponsored by [name of student
organization]. the use of university of richmond facilities for this event does not constitute an
endorsement by the university. the views expressed during this event are those of the speaker(s)
and not the university. the university of richmond does not endorse or oppose candidates for
public office."
o the recognized student political club or organization sponsoring the event is responsible for
complying with this policy and for communicating these requirements to the candidate and the
campaign staff.
2. appearances sponsored by the university. the university may invite candidates for elected office to
speak on campus individually or in a candidate forum. members of the faculty or staff who wish to
request that the university sponsor a candidate appearance or forum, should f ollowing the process set
forth in section c of this policy. in sponsoring such appearances, the university will comply with the
following:
o the event cannot be a campaign rally. instead, it must be a speech, candidate forum, or debate,
preferably with opportunity for questions and answers from the audience.
o campaign fundraising at the event is prohibited.
o the event must be open to the campus community.
o if the university invites a candidate to speak individually, the university will provide an equal
opportunity to all other legally qualified, major party candidates for that office.
o if the university hosts a candidate forum, all legally qualified, major party candidates for the same
office shall be invited and given equal opportunity to speak. the format and content of the forum
shall be neutral and shall not directly or indirectly favor a particular candidate.
o if the university hosts a candidate debate, the event shall comply with applicable debate rules (e.g.,
those of the commission on presidential debates). the university shall ensure that the criteria for
selecting participants is non-partisan and that the format or structure of the debate is not designed
to promote or advance one candidate over others.
o the university will designate a non- partisan modera tor for the event who will ensure that all
ground rules for the event are followed.
o posters, social media, emails, flyers, and websites promoting the event must include a disclaimer
stating that the university of richmond does not endorse candidates for public office. where
possible, the following language should be used: "the use of university of richmond facilities for
this event does not constitute an endorsement by the university. the views expressed during this
event are those of the speaker(s) and not the university. the university of richmond does not
endorse or oppose candidates for public office."
o at the beginning of the event, the event moderator or another speaker shall deliver the followi ng
disclaimer to the audience: "the use of university of richmond facilities for this event does not
constitute an endorsement by the university. the views expressed during this event are those of
the speaker(s) and not the university. the university of richmond does not endorse or oppose
candidates for public office."

gov-4001 – policy on political campaign activities on campus
university of richmond | 5
3. appearance by candidates for non -campaign purposes. candidates for public office may appear on
campus for non-campaign related activities, such as classroom lectures or educational or informational
talks to the university community. other than classroom lectures at the invitation of the faculty member
teaching the class, such appearances must be sponsored by a university department or officially
recognized campus organization. other than classroom lectures at the invitation of the faculty member
teaching the class, all such appearances must be approved as provided in section c of this policy.
additionally, all such appearances must comply with the following:
o the individual(s) is/are chosen to speak for reasons other than candidacy for public office.
o the individual speaks in a non-candidate capacity.
o the event or organization maintains a nonpartisan atmosphere.
o no specific organized campaigning activity occurs in connection with the event, even by third
parties.
o the campus event involving a candidate should not be dictated by, or put under the control of, a
candidate, his or her representatives, or any outside organization.
o other than classroom lectures at the invitation of the faculty member teaching the class, any such
event must be open first to the entire university community (without preference based on political
affiliation) and then, if space permits, to the general public (again, without preference based on
political affiliation).
4. non-sponsored events. a political campaign or a third-party organization may seek to use university
facilities for a candidate appearance or political event. such requests shall be evaluated initially by the
university's events, conferences and support services staff in accordance with its policies and
procedures applicable to all other third-party requests to use university facilities. such initial evaluation
shall include determining whether the requested and/or appropriate space is available on the dates
requested, the availability of university sta ff to support the event, and the logistics involved in
permitting the event. this review shall be conducted in a non-partisan manner that does not favor any
candidate, political party, or political opinion. if the events, conferences and support servic es
determines that the university has the facilities and resources to support the event, then the request shall
be reviewed in accordance with the process set forth in section c of this policy. all such events shall
comply with the following:
o campaign fundraising at the event is prohibited.
o the university will provide an equal opportunity to all other legally qualified, major party
candidates for that office to rent space on the same terms and conditions.
o the university shall charge the candidate or campaign its usual and customary rates for the space
and support services, if any.
o the university shall prohibit the candidate or campaign from using any registered logo or mark of
the university of richmond, including the university shield or the spider silhouette, on posters,
social media, emails, flyers, and websites promoting the event.
o the university shall use reasonable efforts to require the candidate or campaign to include in
posters, social media, emails, flyers, and websites promoting the event must include a disclaimer
substantially similar to the following: "the use of university of richmond facilities for this event
does not constitute an endorsement by the university. the views expressed during this event are

gov-4001 – policy on political campaign activities on campus
university of richmond | 6
those of the speaker(s) and not the u niversity. the university of richmond does not endorse or
oppose candidates for public office."
o the university shall use reasonable efforts to require, at the beginning of the event, that the event
moderator deliver a disclaimer to the audience substanti ally similar to the following: "the use of
university of richmond facilities for this event does not constitute an endorsement by the
university. the views expressed during this event are those of the speaker(s) and not the
university. the university of richmond does not endorse or oppose candidates for public office."
c. review process for appearances by candidates on campus.
the staff of the university's events, conferences and support services office will review all requests
to use university facilities for candidate appearances in accordance with its standard policies and
procedures, including the centralized scheduling policy. upon completion of that review process, the
director of events, conferences and support services, or his/her designee, shall make a preliminary
recommendation to the executive vice president and chief operating officer, the vice president and
general counsel, and the vice president and secretary to the board of trustees regarding the
university's ability to host the event, based on the availability of facilities, support staff, other event
obligations, security, logistics, and compliance with this policy. the executive vice president and
chief operating officer and the vice president and general counsel shall review the recommendation
and consult, as necessary, with the president and members of the president's cabinet, before making a
final decision regarding the event.
the review process described in this section c shall be conducted in a non-partisan and equitable manner
and shall not favor or disadvantage any candidate for public office based on political party or political
opinions or positions.
d. prohibited activities.
the following campaign-related activities are prohibited on the campus or in connection with the use of
university facilities:
1. fundraising. all fundraising activities related to raising money for political campaigns are strictly
prohibited. funds or contributions for political candidates or campaig ns may not be solicited in the
name of the university, and university resources may not be used in soliciting such funds. if students,
faculty, or staff make political contributions, they must do so as individuals and not on behalf of the
university. administrative officers, faculty, and staff, and any person or organization acting on their
behalf, may not solicit or accept funds or contributions for political candidates or campaigns from donors
identified through donor rolls or other university records or directories.
2. donations to campaigns, pacs . the use of university funds to make donations to a campaign or a
political action committee ( "pac") is prohibited. similarly, the university shall not reimburse
university employees for donations to campaigns or pacs.
3. use of university name, logos, or marks. use of the name, logo, or registered marks of the university
or any of its schools or other units on letters or other materials intended to support or oppose a candidate
for public office, including the solicitation of funds for such purpose or activities is prohibited.
4. use of university resources. except as specifically allowed pursuant to this policy, the use university
resources, for political campaigns, to support or oppose a candidate for public office is prohibited. for
purposes of this policy, university resources include, but are not limited to:

gov-4001 – policy on political campaign activities on campus
university of richmond | 7
o university owned or leased buildings and open spaces on campus;
o lists of university employees, students, alumni or donors;
o university letterhead, envelopes, email accounts, telephone lines and voicemail systems; and
o university equipment, including copiers and printers.
related policies:
n/a
policy background:
original policy was reviewed by president's cabinet prior to approval in 2016.
reviewed july 2018.
non-substantive updates made september 2023 for revised titles.
policy contacts:
vice president and general counsel