university of richmond | 1
purpose:
this policy is designed to foster compliance with title ix of the education amendments of 1972 (title ix),
title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 (title vii), other applicable laws, and the university of richmond's
prohibition against sexual harassment, including sexual misconduct (as defined in this policy). this policy
sets forth the university's grievance procedures for the prompt and equitable resolution of formal complaints
of sexual harassment, including the requirements for reporting information that may reasonably constitute
sexual harassment/sexual misconduct, and the university's process for responding to reports and formal
complaints alleging sexual harassment/sexual misconduct.
as a recipient of federal funds, the university of richmond complies with title ix which provides: "no person in
the united states shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied benefits of, or be
subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving federal financial assistance."
this policy and related university policies and procedures are not contracts and do not confer contractual rights
upon any individual. the university has the right to amend or modify this policy and related university policies
and procedures from time to time, without prior notice. additionally, this policy and related university policies
and procedures are not intended to replicate or supersede local, state, or federal criminal or civil laws. university
policies differ from the criminal and civil justice system and a finding of responsibility for conduct prohibited by
this policy shall not be construed as a finding that any criminal or civil statute has been violated.
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and its education program or activity (as defined herein). it
also applies to affiliates of the university. this policy sets forth the process for handling complaints of sexual
policy #: gov-3104
policy title: policy on prohibiting and responding to
sexual harassment / sexual misconduct –
faculty and staff
effective: 07/01/2025 responsible office: compliance, title ix and non-discrimination
date
approved:
06/18/2025 approval: vice president & general counsel
chief human resources officer
replaces
policy dated:
12/16/2024 responsible
university official:
director of compliance and title ix
coordinator
university of richmond
policy manual

university of richmond | 2
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
harassment/sexual misconduct. for information on the university's procedures for responding to sex
discrimination, other than sexual harassment and sexual misconduct, see the related policies listed at the end of
this policy.
1. individuals covered
this policy applies to all students, faculty, and staff of the university.
this policy and the processes described herein are the same for all complainants and respondents
regardless of gender, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression. this policy and the processes
described herein will be implemented without regard to an individual's nationality or immigration
status. the university, including the university police department, title ix coordinators, and title ix
investigators, will not inquire into an individual's immigration status when responding to a report of
possible sexual harassment/sexual misconduct.
2. locations covered for sexual harassment/sexual misconduct
the policy shall apply to conduct that occurs on the campus of the university, on or in off-campus
buildings or property of the university, and at university sponsored activities (including off-campus
education programs and activities), or on public property. the university will also address conduct that
creates or may create a hostile environment under its education program or activity even when some
of the conduct alleged to be contributing to the hostile environment occurs outside the university's
education program or activity or outside the united states.
index:
3104.1 ............... policy
3104.2 ............... definitions
3104.3 ............... roles and responsibilities
3104.4 ............... reporting sexual harassment/sexual misconduct
3104.5 ............... immediate actions, help, and resources
3104.6 ............... initial process for addressing notice or a formal compliant of sexual harassment/sexual
misconduct
3104.7 ............... investigation, formal and alternative resolution process for complaints of sexual
harassment/sexual misconduct
policy statement:
gov- 3104.1 – policy
the university of richmond prohibits discrimination against applicants, students, faculty, or staff on the basis
of race, color, religion, national or ethnic origin, ethnicity, age, sex, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity,
gender expression, disability, military or veteran status, or any classification protected by local, state, or federal

university of richmond | 3
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
law.1
this prohibition includes all sexual harassment/sexual misconduct occurring in any education program or
activity operated by the university in the united states, in compliance with title ix, title vii, and applicable
implementing regulations.
as described in this policy, the university shall make reasonable efforts to investigate and appropriately
address reports of sexual harassment/sexual misconduct. when the university has knowledge of conduct
that may reasonably constitute sexual harassment/sexual misconduct, the university will take prompt and
effective steps reasonably calculated to end such harassment or misconduct, eliminate any hostile
environment or its effects, and prevent its recurrence.
for questions about this policy, including the application of title ix and its implementing regulations, please
contact the university's director of compliance and title ix coordinator, kristine henderson, fountain hall,
suite 101, (804) 289- 8186, khender3@richmond.edu.
further information about the application of title ix
and its implementing regulations is available from the assistant secretary for civil rights, u.s. department of
education, office of civil rights, 400 maryland avenue, sw, washington, dc, 20202-1100; 800-421-3481;
ocr@ed.gov; or
http://www.ed.gov/ocr.
gov-3104.2 – definitions
a. campus. the term "campus" includes any building or property owned or controlled by the university
within the same reasonably contiguous geographic area of the university and used by the university in
direct support of, or in a manner related to, its educational purposes, including residence halls and
apartments and any building or property within or reasonably contiguous to the campus that is owned
by the university, is frequently used by students, and supports university purposes.
b. complainant. the term "complainant" as used in this policy refers to the individual who is alleged to
be the victim of conduct that may constitute sexual harassment/sexual misconduct or retaliation. the
complainant may or may not be the individual who makes the report of sexual harassment/sexual
misconduct. a complainant can be a person of any gender, sexual orientation, gender identity or
gender expression. a complainant need not be a university student, faculty, or staff member, but the
administrative response and investigation described in this policy will apply only if the respondent is
a university student, staff, or faculty member.
c. confidential resource. the term "confidential resource" means a university employee: (a) whose
communications are privileged and confidential under federal or state law and who received
information in the scope of their duties to which the privilege applies; or (b) designated by the
university to provide services to persons relating to sexual harassment/sexual misconduct who
receives information while providing such services. a list and contact information for the university's
confidential resources is available here
.
d. consent. the term "consent" means clear and unambiguous agreement to engage in sexual activity as
evidenced by words or actions that demonstrate a knowing and voluntary willingness to engage in
mutually agreed upon sexual activity. consent cannot be gained by force, duress, intimidation,
coercion, ignoring objections, or taking advantage of another's incapacitation. consent cannot be
1 the statement set forth in this paragraph may not be altered or amended without the approval of the university of richmond board of
trustees.

university of richmond | 4
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
inferred from silence or any other lack of active resistance. consent cannot be inferred from the way a
person is dressed. consent cannot be assumed from the fact of spending money on another person
(e.g., buying a meal on a date).
prior consent does not imply consent to future sexual acts. a current or prior consensual dating or
sexual relationship, alone, does not imply consent to sexual activity or preclude a finding of sexual
misconduct. in addition, consent to one type of sexual act does not automatically imply consent to any
other type of sexual act.
consent may be withdrawn at any time through clear words or actions such as walking or running
away, pushing the other party away, or attempting to physically stop the other party. once a person
withdraws consent, sexual activity must stop, regardless of the extent or nature of the sexual behavior
that has occurred up to the moment that consent is withdrawn. for example, if one individual clearly
says "no" and the other continues penetration or another form of sexual contact, it is sexual
misconduct.
consent cannot be given by the following persons:
o individuals who are mentally incapacitated at the time of the sexual contact in a manner
that prevents them from understanding the nature or consequences of the sexual act
involved, including incapacitation as a result of alcohol or drug use;
o individuals who are asleep, unconscious or otherwise physically helpless; and
o minors.
the following definitions are applicable to determining whether consent has been given:
1. incapacitation. incapacitation is defined as the physical and/or mental inability to make informed,
rational judgments that prevents an individual from giving valid consent. incapacitation may be caused
by a permanent or temporary physical or mental impairment. incapacitation may also result from the
consumption of alcohol or the use of drugs.
the use of alcohol or drugs may, but does not automatically, affect a person's ability to consent to
sexual contact. the consumption of alcohol or drugs may result in incapacitation if the nature and
degree of the intoxication go beyond the stage of drunkenness, intoxication, or reduced inhibition to
the point where the individual is unable to make knowing, informed decisions or to understand the
nature and consequences of the sexual act. in such case, the person cannot consent to sexual activity,
regardless of their words or actions.
a person violates this policy if they have sexual contact with someone they know or should
know is incapacitated or has reached the degree of intoxication that results in incapacitation.
the test of whether an individual should know about another's incapacitation is whether a
reasonable, sober person would know about the incapacitation. a respondent cannot rebut a
sexual misconduct charge merely by arguing that they were drunk or otherwise impaired and,
as a result did not know that the other person was incapacitated.
a person who is passed out or unconscious is incapacitated and, therefore, is not able to consent.
2. coercion. coercion is unreasonable, inappropriate pressure to engage in sexual activity. coercive
behavior is different than romantic or seductive behavior because coercive behavior involves
inappropriate or unreasonable pressure to obtain consent from another person for sexual activity.
continued pressure to engage in sexual activity after the other person makes it clear that they do not want

university of richmond | 5
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
to engage in, want to stop, or do not want to go further with sexual activity can be coercion.
3. physical force. physically restraining a person against their will, using violence or the threat of violence,
or using a weapon or threatening to use a weapon constitutes physical force. an example of physical
force includes using bodyweight to hold someone in place.
4. threats. threats cause a person to do something that they would not have done without the threat. examples
of threats include, but are not limited to:
• "if you do not have sex with me, i will harm someone close to you."
• "if you do not do what i want, i will tell people that you are gay."
• "if you do not hook up with me, i will tell people you are a whore."
• "if you stop hooking up with me, i will kill myself."
5. intimidation. intimidation is defined as an implied threat. examples of intimidation include use of body
size to block an exit, breaking or smashing items, or using looks or gestures to create fear.
e. education program or activity. the phrase "education program or activity" means all of the
operations of the university. for purposes of this policy, conduct that occurs under the university's
education program or activity includes but is not limited to conduct that occurs at locations, during
events or under circumstances over which the university exercised substantial control over both the
respondent and the context in which the conduct took place. it also includes a building owned or
controlled by a recognized student organization and conduct that is subject to the university's
standards of student conduct
. the university will address conduct that creates or may create a
hostile environment under its education program or activity even when some of the conduct alleged
to be contributing to the hostile environment occurs outside the university's education program or
activity or outside the united states.
f. formal complaint. the term "formal complaint" means a document filed by a complainant or
signed by the title ix coordinator alleging sexual harassment/sexual misconduct against a
respondent and requesting that the university investigate the allegations of sexual misconduct.
g. hostile environment. a "hostile environment" means unwelcome conduct based on sex that, based
on the totality of the circumstances, is subjectively and objectively offensive and is so severe and/or
pervasive that it limits or denies a person's ability to participate in or benefit from the university's
education program or activity.
h. hostile environment harassment. the term "hostile environment harassment" means unwelcome
conduct on the basis of sex that, based on the totality of the circumstances, is subjectively and
objectively offensive and is so severe and/or pervasive that it limits or denies a person's equal access
to participate in or benefit from the university's education program or activity or equal access to the
benefits or privileges of employment. determining whether a hostile environment has been created is
a fact-specific inquiry.
i. off-campus buildings or property of the university. the term "off-campus buildings or property
of the university" includes any building or property owned or controlled by the university or a
student organization officially recognized by the university, that is used in direct support of, or in
relation to, the university's educational purposes, and frequently used by students.
j. public property. the term "public property" includes streets, sidewalks, or parking facilities within

university of richmond | 6
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
the campus or immediately adjacent to and accessible from campus.
k. quid pro quo harassment. "quid pro quo harassment" occurs when a faculty or staff member of the
university, an authorized agent of the university or another person authorized by the university to provide
aid, benefit or services under the university's education program or activity, explicitly or impliedly
conditions a provision of such aid, benefit or service on an individual's participation in unwelcome sexual
conduct.
l. respondent. the term "respondent" as used in this policy refers to the individual who has been
alleged to have been engaged in conduct that may constitute sexual harassment/sexual misconduct.
a respondent can be a person of any gender, sexual orientation, gender identity or gender expression.
m. responsible employees. the term "responsible employee" means an employee of the university who is
not a confidential resource and who has the authority to institute corrective measures or take action to
redress alleged sexual harassment, including sexual misconduct and sexual violence, who has been given
the duty of reporting acts of sexual harassment and sexual misconduct, to the title ix coordinators, has
responsibility for administrative leadership, teaching, or advising, or is a person whom a student could
reasonably believe has the authority to take action. a list of university employees designated as responsible
employees is available here
.
n. retaliation. the term "retaliation" means intimidation, threats, coercion, or discrimination against
any individual by the university, a university student, faculty, or staff member, or anyone else
authorized by the university to provide aid, benefit, or service under the university's education
program or activity, for the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege secured by title ix or
this policy or because the individual has made a report or formal complaint, testified, assisted, or
participated or refused to participate in any manner in any investigation or formal resolution process.
o. sexual harassment. the term "sexual harassment" means conduct on the basis of sex, sex stereotypes, sex
characteristics, pregnancy or related conditions, sexual orientation, gender identity, or gender expression that
constitutes quid pro quo harassment, hostile environment harassment, or sexual misconduct, all as
defined in this policy.
p.
sexual misconduct. the term "sexual misconduct" means dating violence, domestic violence, non-
consensual sexual contact, non-consensual sexual intercourse, sexual assault, incest, and stalking as
defined in this policy.
1. dating violence the term "dating violence" means violence, including sexual or physical
abuse, or the threat of such abuse committed by a person who is or has been in a social
relationship of a romantic or intimate nature with the complainant. the existence of such a
relationship will be determined based on the reporting party's statement and with
consideration of the length of the relationship, the type of relationship, and the frequency of
interaction between the individuals involved in the relationship. dating violence does not
include conduct that falls within the definition of domestic violence.
2. domestic violence. the term "domestic violence" means conduct that would constitute a
felony or misdemeanor crime of violence under virginia law committed by: (a) a current or
former spouse or intimate partner of the complainant under the family or domestic violence
laws of virginia; (b) a person with whom the complainant shares a child in common; (c) a
person who is cohabitating or has cohabitated with the complainant as a spouse or intimate
partner; (d) a person similarly situated to a spouse of the complainant under the domestic or
family violence laws of virginia; or (e) any other person against an adult or youth who is

university of richmond | 7
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
protected from that person's acts under the domestic or family violence laws of virginia.
3. incest. the term "incest" means nonforcible sexual intercourse between persons who are related to each
other within the degrees wherein marriage is prohibited by applicable state law.
4. non-consensual sexual contact. the term "non-consensual sexual contact: means any sexual
contact that occurs without consent. sexual contact means physical contact committed with the
intent to sexually molest, arouse or gratify any person, where one person intentionally touches
another's intimate parts or clothing directly covering such intimate parts or causes a person to
touch their own intimate parts or clothing directly covering such intimate parts. examples of
sexual contact include, but are not limited to, the intentional touching of a person's genitalia,
groin, breast, or buttocks or the clothing covering any of those areas, or using force to cause the
person to touch their own genitalia, groin, breast, or buttocks. non-consensual sexual contact
may also be referenced as criminal sexual contact..
5. non-consensual sexual intercourse. the term "non-consensual sexual intercourse" means any
act of sexual intercourse that occurs without consent. sexual intercourse is defined by
penetration (anal, oral, or vaginal), however slight, by a penis, tongue, finger, or inanimate
object. non-consensual sexual intercourse may also be referred to as rape.
6. sexual assault. the term "sexual assault" means non- consensual sexual contact, non-consensual
sexual intercourse, and incest. it also includes an offense classified as a forcible or nonforcible sex
offense under the uniform crime reporting system of the federal bureau of investigation.
7. stalking. the term "stalking" means engaging in a course of conduct directed at a specific person
(including surveillance, repeated phone calls, emails, text messages, social media messages, use of
other technology or in-person contact) that would cause a reasonable person to fear for their own
safety or the safety of others or to suffer substantial emotional distress. any act that constitutes
stalking under virginia law is also prohibited under this policy.
a. course of conduct. a course of conduct means two or more acts, including, but not limited to,
acts in which the person directly, indirectly, or through third parties, by any action, method,
device, or means, follows, monitors, observes, surveils, threatens, or communicates to or about,
another person, or interferes with another person's property.
b. substantial emotional distress. substantial emotional distress means significant mental
suffering or anguish that may, but does not necessarily, require medical or other professional
treatment or counseling.
q. sexual violence. the term "sexual violence" means any physical sexual act or acts perpetrated against a
person's will or against a person incapable of giving consent. examples of sexual violence include non-
consensual sexual contact, non-consensual sexual intercourse, and sexual assault.
r. student. the term "student" includes all persons who have gained admission to the university and all
persons taking courses at the university, either full-time or part-time, pursuing undergraduate, graduate, or
professional studies.
s. supportive measures. the term "supportive measures" means individualized measures offered as
appropriate and as reasonably available to a complainant, respondent, or witness, without fee or charge,
designed to: (1) restore or preserve the individual's equal access to the university's education programs and
activity or equal access to the benefits or privileges of employment; (2) protect the safety of the individuals
or the campus community; or (3) provide support during an investigation, formal resolution process, or

university of richmond | 8
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
alternative resolution process under this policy. supportive measures are non-disciplinary and non-punitive
and should not unreasonably burden the other party.
t. title ix coordinator. the term "title ix coordinator" refers to the university's title ix coordinator, its
deputy title ix coordinators, and/or any designees appointed by the title ix coordinator or deputy title
ix coordinator(s).
gov-3104.3 – roles and responsibilities
a. the title ix coordinator
the university's title ix coordinators are responsible for ensuring the university's compliance with title
ix. this policy sets forth the obligations of the appropriate title ix coordinator upon receipt of
information that may reasonably constitute sexual harassment or sexual misconduct or a formal
complaint.
for more information on the role of title ix coordinators at the university, see the university's
title
ix coordinators policy.
b. the university of richmond police department
the university of richmond police department (urpd) is a full-service law enforcement agency
accredited by the commission on accreditation for law enforcement agencies and the international
association of campus law enforcement administrators.
urpd responds to all reports of criminal activity occurring on campus including incidents of sexual
assault, domestic violence, stalking, and dating violence. urpd enforces virginia law and will
coordinate certain investigations with the commonwealth attorney. in response to a call for service,
urpd will dispatch an officer to assist the victim with filing an incident report. urpd notifies the
university's title ix coordinators of any report of sexual misconduct. the detectives from the urpd
will investigate a report of criminal sexual misconduct occurring on the university's campus or will
assist students, faculty, and staff in reporting to other law enforcement agencies if the misconduct
occurs off campus.
urpd is the designated reporter under the jeanne clery disclosure of campus security policy
("clery act") and campus crime statistics act for the university of richmond, issues timely
warnings, and maintains the university's crime log.
c. human resources office
the university's human resources office serves as an important source of information, support, and
guidance to faculty and staff involved in a formal complaint or an alternative or formal resolution
process under this policy. this office plays a crucial role in implementing this policy when allegations of
sexual harassment/sexual misconduct involve faculty or staff members.
geraldine sullivan, chief human resource officer and deputy title ix coordinator for employees can be
reached at (804) 289-8747.
gov-3104.4 – reporting sexual harassment/sexual misconduct
a. required reporting. all responsible employees are required to notify the title ix coordinator when the
responsible employee has information about conduct involving a university student, faculty or staff member
that may reasonably constitute sexual harassment/sexual misconduct. additionally, the university strongly

university of richmond | 9
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
encourages all members of the campus community to promptly report potential sexual harassment/sexual
misconduct.
b. how to report. information that may reasonably constitute sexual harassment/sexual misconduct
should be reported as follows:
• students: for matters involving students as the subject of and the person engaging in the
alleged sexual harassment/sexual misconduct, contact tracy cassalia, deputy title ix and
non-discrimination coordinator, at (804) 289-8464, tcassali@richmond.edu. for matters
involving a student and a faculty or staff member as either the subject of or the person
engaging in alleged sexual harassment/sexual misconduct, contact tracy cassalia, as noted
above, and she will coordinate with the chief human resources officer and deputy title ix
coordinator for employees.
• faculty and staff: for matters involving faculty or staff as the subject of and person engaging in
alleged sexual harassment/sexual misconduct, contact geraldine sullivan, chief human
resources officer and deputy title ix coordinator for employees at (804) 289-8166,
geraldine.sullivan@richmond.edu
information may also be provided to kristine henderson, director of compliance and title ix
coordinator at (804) 289-8186, khender3@richmond.edu.
while the university encourages people to report concerns regarding alleged sexual harassment/
sexual misconduct directly to the individuals listed above, reports may also be made via the
university's ethics and compliance helpline or the online report
form.
c. reporting to urpd. all members of the university community are encouraged to report sexual misconduct
that may constitute a crime to the urpd. reports to urpd can be made by calling 8911 (from a campus
phone) or (804) 289-8911.members of the campus community may also contact eric beatty, major,
university police at 804-289-8723, for general information about reporting options and the university's
policies and procedures.
a complainant may speak with a urpd detective before deciding whether to file a police report. a
complainant may file a report with urpd even if they have not decided whether to pursue a criminal
investigation. reporting an incident is a separate step from choosing to pursue a criminal investigation
and prosecution. a complainant who files a report with urpd, or another local law enforcement
agency, is not required to continue with criminal proceedings.
the criminal investigation is independent from any investigation undertaken by the title ix coordinators
under this policy. however, urpd and the title ix coordinators will collaborate to the extent possible and
will seek to avoid unnecessary burdens on the parties.
gov-3104.5 – immediate actions, help, and resources
a. immediate actions
any individual who has experienced sexual misconduct that may constitute a crime, is encouraged to do
the following as promptly as possible, in order to preserve evidence that may assist in proving that the
alleged offense occurred or may be helpful in obtaining a protective order:
o get to a safe place as soon as possible.

university of richmond | 10
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
o try to preserve all physical evidence. do not wash clothes or use the toilet. put all clothing you
were wearing at the time of the incident in a paper bag, not in a plastic bag. all physical
evidence should be provided to police as soon as possible.
o contact urpd by calling 8911 (from a campus phone) or (804) 289-8911. urpd can
assist in contacting other local law enforcement agencies for incidents occurring off
campus. on campus, a blue light emergency phone will connect callers directly to the
urpd dispatcher.
o get medical attention as soon as possible. a medical examination will provide any necessary
treatment and collect important evidence. injuries may not be immediately apparent.
 it is important to seek immediate and follow-up medical attention for several reasons:
• to assess and treat any physical injuries that may have sustained.
• to determine the risk of sexually transmitted diseases or pregnancy and take
appropriate medical measures.
• to gather evidence that may aid criminal prosecution.
o a special hospital exam (perk: physical evidence recovery kit) should be performed by
an emergency department. individuals can receive the exam at st. mary's hospital or
through the virginia commonwealth university health system.
 the hospital emergency departments follow national standards for survivor care,
sexual assault exams, and evidence collection procedures.
 anyone concerned about anonymity, can speak with hospital personnel regarding options
for confidentiality. inform the triage nurse of this request for anonymity upon arrival to an
emergency room. there are many resources available to individuals that may assist with
perk exam costs, and medical personnel will provide more information. at the hospital,
individuals may choose to undergo a perk exam even if they are unsure whether they want
to report the sexual misconduct to the police and want time to think about it. hospital
nurses will collect the evidence without revealing the identity of the individual to the
authorities. the evidence will be held for at least two years before being discarded. the
individual must contact the storage facility in writing for an extension beyond that point.
b. counseling and emotional support resources
1. on-campus resources
o employee assistance program. all employees have access to the university's employee
assistance program (eap) offered through the university's insurance provider, cigna.
the eap provides personal advocates who will work with employees and their household
family members to help resolve issues they may be facing, connect them with mental
health professionals, and direct them to a variety of helpful resources in the community.
eap can be reached 24 hours a day, seven days a week at 1-877-622-4327 or by logging
onto the mycigna website using the employer id 'richmond'. this resource is available to
employees only.
o onsite behavioral health counselor. the behavioral health counselor will assist
employees in an environment to support and foster personal well-being. the behavioral
health counselor will also help employees' access eap services. confidential
appointments are available by appointmen. the onsite behavioral health counselor
can be reached at 804-240-8628.

university of richmond | 11
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
o urpd victim/witness services. the university of richmond victim/witness assistance
program is operated out of the university police department, which is located on the
ground floor of the special programs building and may be contacted by calling (804)
289-8715, 24 hours a day, seven days a week. university of richmond detectives serve
as liaisons between the city of richmond and the county of henrico courts systems.
detectives assist victims to obtain services to include counseling and psychological
support, guidance to area resources, and assistance through the court process.
2. off-campus resources
o greater richmond regional hotline. the greater richmond regional hotline, available at
(804) 612-6126, is a crisis response system for people across the region impacted or affected
by domestic, intimate partner, and/or sexual violence.
calling the hotline will connect callers to a local specialist who can offer support and
information about resources and experts in the richmond area. the hotline is available 24
hours per day, seven days a week and is open to survivors and supporters. the ywca, safe
harbor, and other area organizations, sponsor the hotline.
o safe harbor. safe harbor supports those who are experiencing or have experienced domestic
and/or sexual violence. safe harbor offers comprehensive services for survivors of sexual
and/or intimate partner violence including: a 24-hour helpline at (804) 612-6126,
children/youth services, community education and training, counseling, court advocacy,
emergency shelter, and hospital accompaniment.
o virginia anti-violence project. the virginia anti-violence project offers support for
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and questioning survivors of sexual assault and/or
intimate partner violence as well as hate-motivated violence. virginia's 24/7 lgbtq+
helpline can be reached by calling 1-866-356-6998.
c. other available resources
1. transportation
the university police are always available to transport victims of sexual misconduct to the
hospital. to ask for transportation, call the university police dispatcher at (804) 289-8715 and ask
for immediate assistance. members of the university richmond police department are considered
responsible employees and have an obligation to report information regarding sexual misconduct
to the title ix coordinator.
gov-3104.6 – initial process for addressing notice or a formal complaint of sexual harassment/sexual
misconduct
a. formal complaints of sexual harassment or sexual misconduct.
1. formal complaints by members of the campus community. a formal complaint may be filed with the
title ix coordinator in person, by mail, or by electronic mail, and must contain the complainant's
physical or digital signature.
2. formal complaints by the title ix coordinator. under certain circumstances, the title ix coordinator
may file a formal complaint even if the complaint has elected not to do so. in those circumstances, the
title ix coordinator will seek to balance a complainant's request for confidentiality with the need to
protect members of the campus community. factors considered by the title ix coordinator will include

university of richmond | 12
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
the following:
o the seriousness of the alleged sexual harassment/sexual misconduct;
o circumstances indicating increased risk of additional acts by the respondent;
o the complainant's reasonable safety concerns regarding the initiation of a complaint;
o the basis for the complainant's request not to proceed;
o prior complaints against the respondent;
o any history of the respondent's arrests;
o threats from the respondent;
o the involvement of multiple alleged perpetrators;
o any pattern of perpetration via drugs or alcohol at a given location or by a given group;
o the age of complainant; and
o the ability of the university to gather relevant evidence.
the title ix coordinator may consult with the sexual misconduct review subcommittee and
other university officials when considering these factors.
if the title ix coordinator determines that the alleged conduct presents an imminent and serious
threat to the health or safety of the complainant or another individual, or that the alleged conduct
prevents the university from ensuring equal access on the basis of sex to is education program or
activity, the title ix coordinator may initiate the formal complaint.
if the title ix coordinator decides to initiate a complaint under this subsection, the title ix coordinator
will notify the complainant in advance and will use reasonable efforts to address reasonable concerns
about the complainant's privacy, safety, or the safety of others, including by providing supportive
measures.
b. initial response
the title ix coordinator will respond to reports of sexual harassment/sexual misconduct, regardless
of whether the report is made directly by the complainant, by another student, faculty member, staff
member, or other third party. the title ix coordinator will respond to all formal complaints as set
forth in this policy.
1. outreach to complainant. upon receipt of a formal complaint or notice of conduct that
reasonably may constitute sexual harassment/sexual misconduct within the scope of this policy,
title ix coordinator will contact the complainant if their identity is known in writing and offer to
meet with the complainant. the purpose of this meeting is to advise the complainant of their rights
and options under this policy and it is not intended to gather information as part of the investigation
of a complaint. when the title ix coordinator meets with the complainant, the title ix
coordinator will provide the following information:
• the complainant's rights under this policy and other relevant university policies;
• the university's obligation to treat both the complainant and the respondent equitably;
• the university's obligation to investigate promptly a formal complaint of sexual
harassment/sexual misconduct under this policy;

university of richmond | 13
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
• the complainant's reporting rights, including the right to pursue or not to pursue criminal
action;
• the importance of the collection and preservation of evidence;
• the importance of seeking appropriate medical attention;
• the available options for pursuing a protective order;
• the complainant's right to participate or decline to participate in any investigation;
• that the respondent is presumed to be not responsible for the alleged conduct until a
determination regarding responsibility is made at the end of the formal resolution
process;
• that the university prohibits retaliation as described in this policy;
• the complainant's right to an advisor of their choosing and to have the advisor present at all
meetings with the title ix coordinator, the investigator and during a formal or alternative
resolution process;
• information about the formal resolution and alternative resolution processes and
university procedures for pursuing a formal complaint ;
• the availability and type of supportive measures; and
• the process for handling requests for confidentiality or requests to not move forward with a
formal complaint.
the title ix coordinator will provide the complainant time to consider their rights and options and to
determine whether the complainant wishes to move forward with the filing of a formal complaint.
2. outreach to the respondent. following receipt or initiation of a formal complaint, the title ix
coordinator will contact the respondent in writing and offer to meet with the respondent. the purpose
of this meeting is to advise the respondent of their rights and options under this policy and it is not
intended to gather information as part of the investigation of a complaint. when the title ix coordinator
meets with the respondent, the coordinator will provide the following information
• the respondent's rights under this policy and other relevant university policies;
• the university's obligation to treat both the complainant and the respondent equitably;
• the university's obligation to investigate promptly a formal complaint of sexual
harassment/sexual misconduct under this policy;
• the importance of the collection and preservation of evidence;
• the respondent's right to participate or decline to participate in any investigation;
• that the respondent is presumed to be not responsible for the alleged conduct until a
determination regarding responsibility is made at the end of the formal resolution
process;
• that the university prohibits retaliation as described in this policy;
• the respondent's right to an advisor of their choosing and to have the advisor present at all
meetings with the title ix coordinator, the investigator and during a formal or alternative

university of richmond | 14
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
resolution process;
• information about the formal resolution and alternative resolution processes and
university procedures for pursuing a formal complaint ;
• the availability and type of supportive measures; and
• the complainant's right to pursue a criminal complaint, in addition to their rights under
this policy.
3. written notice of allegations, procedures and rights. upon initiation of a formal complaint, the title
ix coordinator shall provide written notice to the complainant and respondent, if their identities are
known, that sets forth the information listed below. this written notice shall be provided with sufficient
time for the complainant and respondent to prepare for an interview. if the title ix coordinator has
reasonable concerns for the safety of any person as a result of providing the written notice described in
this section, the title ix coordinator may reasonably delay providing the notice in order to address the
safety concerns appropriately. reasonable concerns must be based on an individualized safety and risk
analysis and not on speculation or stereotypes. if additional allegations of sexual harassment/sexual
misconduct arise in the course of an investigation, that are not included in the original formal complaint,
or a consolidated formal complaint under this policy, the title ix coordinator shall update this notice.
the content of the written notice shall include:
a. a description of the conduct alleged in the notice or complaint to constitute sexual
harassment/sexual misconduct;
b. the identities of the complainant and respondent, to the extent known;
c. the date(s) and location(s) of the conduct alleged to constitute sexual harassment/sexual
misconduct, to the extent known;
d. other sufficient information known at the time that would allow the complainant and respondent
to respond to the allegations;
e. a copy of or link to this policy and all related university policies setting forth the process for
investigation and formal and alternative resolution of the allegations or formal complaint;
f. a statement that the complainant and respondent have the right to an advisor of their choice who
may, but is not required to be an attorney, and to have the advisor present at all meetings with the
title ix coordinator or the investigator and during any formal or alternative resolution process;
g. a statement that lying to university officials, including during an investigation or formal
resolution process, may result in discipline up to and including termination;
h. a statement that retaliation is prohibited under this policy and related university policies; and
i. a statement that the complainant and respondent are entitled to an equal opportunity to access the
relevant and not otherwise impermissible evidence as provided in this policy.
4. notification to the university police. the title ix coordinator will notify the urpd of any report that
may be required to be included in the crime log and disclosed under the clery act. unless the
complainant wishes to make a police report, their name or other personally identifiable information
will not be included in the report to the urpd, although law enforcement members of the sexual
misconduct review subcommittee, described herein, may have access to identifying information. in
addition, the name of a complainant or respondent are never published in the university's crime log,

university of richmond | 15
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
included in any timely warning message, or as part of the annual campus security report required by
the clery act.
whether a report comes directly from a complainant, the title ix coordinator or another source,
the urpd may determine that a serious or continuing threat possibly exists and may release either
an "emergency notification" or a "timely warning" to the campus community. emergency
notifications must be issued immediately upon confirmation of a significant emergency or
dangerous situation, and timely warnings must be issued if the crime is considered by the institution
to represent a serious or continuing threat. the name of the complainant or respondent or other
personally identifiable information will never be included in emergency notifications or timely
warnings. the title ix coordinator will attempt to notify the complainant in advance if an
emergency notification or a timely warning is going to be distributed. the title ix coordinator will
also attempt to notify the respondent if they have been notified of the formal complaint prior to
issuance of an emergency notification or a timely warning.
5. review by the sexual misconduct review subcommittee of the threat assessment team. to the
extent required under virginia law, the sexual misconduct review subcommittee receives reports
from the title ix coordinators regarding alleged violations of this policy. the sexual misconduct
review subcommittee is a subcommittee of the university's threat assessment team.
the membership of the sexual misconduct review subcommittee includes:
• the title ix coordinator;
• the chief or assistant chief of the university police department (or a designee who shall be a
sworn police officer of the university police department);
• the vice president for student affairs (or a designee who shall be a member of the student
development division); and
• such other members of the university's threat assessment team as the title ix coordinator
deems appropriate.
the sexual misconduct review subcommittee will convene within 72 hours of receiving the report of
an incident from the title ix coordinator to review the information provided by the title ix
coordinator. the responsibilities of the sexual misconduct review subcommittee include:
• providing advice and guidance to the title ix coordinator regarding the investigation, appropriate
supportive measures, and available resources for the involved individuals; and
• determining if the disclosure of information regarding the incident, including personally
identifiable information, is necessary to protect the health or safety of the complainant or other
individuals, consistent with applicable privacy laws, title ix regulations, and this policy. if the
subcommittee, or the representative from the, determines this disclosure is necessary, the
representative from the urpd will immediately disclose the information, including personally
identifiable information about the individuals involved, to the appropriate law enforcement agency.
the title ix coordinator will notify the complainant in advance of any disclosure that is made.
the sexual misconduct review subcommittee will have the access to law enforcement, criminal
history, education, personnel, and health records relevant to the report of sexual harassment/sexual

university of richmond | 16
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
misconduct to the extent necessary to assess any potential risk to members of the campus community
and fulfill the subcommittee's legal responsibilities, and as permitted by applicable law.
the sexual misconduct review subcommittee when appropriate will conduct an individualized safety
and risk analysis to determine if there is an imminent and serious threat to the health or safety of a
complainant or any students, employees, or individual arising from the allegations of
harassment/sexual misconduct and consequently, administrative leave, as described in this policy, is
warranted.
after its initial meeting regarding a report, the sexual misconduct review subcommittee will
reconvene upon the request of the title ix coordinator to provide guidance regarding a pending
investigation or report or to assess and respond to potential risks or threats associated with the reported
incident.
c. supportive measures. the title ix coordinator shall offer and coordinate supportive me asures for
complainants and, where appropriate, respondents and witnesses upon receipt of information about
conduct that may reasonably constitute sexual harassment/sexual misconduct.
1. types of supportive measures . the type of supportive measure(s) offere d and coordinated may vary
based upon the circumstances of a specific matter and the reasonable availability of the supportive
measures. supportive measures include, but are not limited to, those listed
here.
2. purpose / no unreasonable burden. supportive measures shall be designed to: (i) protect the safety of
a complainant, respondent, witness, or the campus community; or (ii) pr ovide support to a
complainant, respondent, or witness during an investigation, formal resolution process, or alternative
resolution process. supportive measures are not used for punitive or disciplinary reasons. supportive
measures should not unreasonabl y burden either the complainant or the respondent.
3. modification, termination, or continuation of supportive measures .
a. the title ix coordinator may modify supportive measures during or after an investigation, formal
resolution process, or alternative resol ution process, consistent with subsection 2, above.
b. the title ix coordinator may continue some or all supportive measures after conclusion of an
investigation, formal resolution process or alternative resolution process as the title ix coordinator
deems reasonably appropriate.
4. confidentiality of supportive measures . the university will maintain the confidentiality of the
supportive measures provided to a complainant, respondent, or witness unless the disclosure is
necessary to implement the supportive mea sure(s), to restore or preserve the complainant's or
respondent's access to the university's education program or activity or equal access to the benefits
or privileges of employment, or one or more of the exceptions to the confidentiality requirement set
forth in this policy apply. the title ix coordinator may consult with the office of disability services
to ensure that any supportive measure offered is implemented in a manner consistent with applicable
disability laws and regulations .
5. exceptions to the confidentiality requirement. the university may disclose information about
supportive measures provided to a complainant or respondent in the following circumstances:
a. when the complainant or respondent, as applicable, has consented to such disclosure;
b. when reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of this policy;

university of richmond | 17
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
c. when such disclosure is required by federal law or regulation or by a federal grant or funding
agreement, consistent with title ix, is required by state or local law, or when permitted under
applicable privacy laws.
d. administrative leave. the university may place an employee respondent on administrative leave from
employment responsibilities during the pendency of an investigation, formal resolution process, or
alternative resolutions process, consistent with other applicable university policies and handbooks.
e. consolidation of formal complaints. when the allegations of sexual harassment/sexual misconduct arise
out of the same facts or circumstances, the title ix coordinator may consolidate two or more formal
complaints of sexual harassment/sexual misconduct: (1) against the same respondent(s); (2) against
multiple respondents; or (3) when the complainant and respondent initiate formal complaints against each
other.
f. dismissal of a formal complaint
1. basis for dismissal of a formal complaint. the title ix coordinator may dismiss a formal complaint at
any time prior to a final determination under formal resolution process or an agreement under an
alternative resolution process for any of the following reasons:
a. the title ix coordinator is unable to identify the respondent after taking reasonable steps to do so;
b. the respondent is not participating in the university's education programs or activity;
c. the respondent is not employed by the university;
d. the complainant voluntarily withdraws, in writing, any or all of the allegations in the complaint, the
title ix coordinator does not initiate a complaint under this policy, and the title ix coordinator
determines that without the withdrawn allegations, the conduct described in the remaining
allegations, if any, would not constitute sexual harassment/sexual misconduct under this policy
even if proven; or
e. the title ix coordinator determines that the conduct alleged in the complaint, even if proven, would
not constitute sexual harassment/sexual misconduct under this policy, provided that the title ix
coordinator has made reasonable efforts to clarify the allegations with the complainant.
2. time frame for decision. the title ix coordinator shall make a decision as to whether to dismiss the
formal complaint within thirty (30) days of receipt of information indicating a potential basis for
dismissal as set forth in section 3104.6(f)(1) of this policy. this time frame may be extended on a
reasonable, case-by-case basis for good cause. the title ix coordinator will notify the complainant and
respondent, in writing, of the extension and the reason for the extension.
3. notice to complainant and respondent. the title ix coordinator shall promptly notify the
complainant, in writing, of the dismissal of a formal complaint and the basis for such dismissal. if the
dismissal occurs after the respondent has been notified of the formal complaint, the title ix
coordinator shall notify the respondent, in writing, of the dismissal of a formal complaint and the basis
for such dismissal at the same time that the complainant is notified. such notice shall include the rights
of the complainant and respondent to file an appeal of the dismissal and the basis for such appeal as set
forth in this policy.
4. supportive measures and steps to prevent sexual harassment or sexual misconduct. if the title ix
coordinator dismissed a formal complaint, the title ix coordinator shall:
a. offer appropriate supportive measures to the complainant;

university of richmond | 18
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
b. offer appropriate supportive measures to the respondent if the dismissal occurs after the
respondent has been notified of the formal complaint; and
c. take other appropriate, prompt, and reasonable steps designed to prevent sexual harassment/sexual
misconduct from continuing or recurring.
5. appeal of decision to dismiss formal complaint. a complainant has a right to appeal the dismissal of a
formal complaint on the grounds set forth in this policy. if the dismissal occurs after the respondent has
been notified of the formal complaint, then the respondent also has a right to appeal the dismissal of the
formal complaint on the grounds set forth in this policy.
a. grounds for appeal. the grounds for an appeal are as follows:
i. a procedural irregularity that would change the outcome of the decision to dismiss the formal
complaint;
ii. the appealing party has identified and proffered new evidence that was not reasonably available
at the time the formal complaint was initiated or the decision to dismiss was made that would
change the outcome of the decision to dismiss the formal complaint; or
iii. the title ix coordinator or the investigator had a conflict of interest or bias for or against
complainants or respondents generally or the individual complainant or respondent that would
change the outcome of the decision to dismiss the formal complaint.
b. process for appeal.
i. the complainant or the respondent may file an appeal with the director of compliance, or their
designee, (the "appellate officer") within five (5) business days of being notified of the title ix
coordinator's decision to dismiss the formal complaint.
ii. the appeal must be in writing and must be emailed to the appellate officer, with a copy to the
title ix coordinator. the appeal must state the grounds for the appeal and may include a
statement in support of the party's appeal or a statement challenging the decision to dismiss the
formal complaint.
iii. the title ix coordinator will notify the parties, in writing, when an appeal is filed and, if the
respondent has not previously been notified of the formal complaint, the title ix coordinator
will notify the respondent of the allegations in the formal complaint.
iv. the appellate officer will respond promptly to such an appeal and shall render a decision in
writing within thirty (30) days of receipt of the appeal. this time frame may be extended on a
reasonable, case-by-case basis for good cause. the appellate officer will notify the complainant
and respondent, in writing, of the extension and the reason for the extension.
v. the appellate officer will provide the complainant and the respondent with a copy of the
decision at the same time.
gov – 3104.7 - investigation, formal and alternative resolution process for complaints of sexual
harassment / sexual misconduct
a. overall requirements
1. prompt and equitable process. this policy is intended and shall be implemented in a manner that
provides a prompt and equitable resolution process for formal complaints of sexual harassment/sexual

university of richmond | 19
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
misconduct. this policy shall be applied in a manner that treats complainants and respondents
equitably.
2. conflicts of interest. the title ix coordinator, the investigator, the appellate officer, and the decision-
maker involved in the university's formal resolution process or alternative resolution process shall not
have a conflict of interest or a bias for or against complainants or respondents generally or the
complainant or respondent involved in the complaint under investigation or adjudication.
3. presumption. in implementing this policy and any investigation, formal resolution process or alternative
resolution process, there shall be a presumption that the respondent is not responsible for the alleged
sexual harassment or sexual misconduct until a determination is made at the end of a formal resolution
process or respondent voluntarily acknowledges their responsibility as part of an alternative resolution
process.
4. privacy. the title ix coordinator, the investigator, the appellate officer and others involved in the
investigation, formal resolution process, and alternative resolution process will take reasonable steps to
protect the privacy of the complainant, the respondent and any witnesses during the process. the
commitment to privacy, however, shall not be implemented in a manner that restricts the ability of the
complainant and respondent to obtain and present evidence, including by speaking to witnesses,
consulting with family members, confidential resources, or advisors, or otherwise preparing for an
investigation, formal resolution process, or alternative resolution process.
5. objective evaluation. the investigator and the decision-maker in a formal resolution process under this
policy shall objectively evaluate all evidence that is relevant and not impermissible (as defined below),
including both inculpatory and exculpatory evidence. the investigator or the decision-maker may engage
in credibility assessments but shall not make credibility determinations based on an individual's status as
a complainant, respondent, or witness.
a. relevant evidence, testimony and questions. evidence, testimony, and questions are considered to
be relevant when they are related to the allegations of sexual harassment/sexual misconduct set
forth in a formal complaint or otherwise under investigation or subject to adjudication in a formal
resolution process. questions are relevant when they seek evidence that may aid in showing whether
the alleged sexual harassment/sexual misconduct occurred. evidence is relevant when it may aid a
decision-maker in determining whether the alleged sexual harassment/sexual misconduct occurred.
b. impermissible evidence, testimony, and questions. the investigator and the decision-maker in a
formal resolution process shall exclude and shall not consider evidence, testimony and questions that
are impermissible under this policy, regardless of whether they are relevant. the following evidence,
testimony and questions are impermissible:
i. evidence or testimony or questions that seek to elicit information that is protected under a
privilege as recognized by federal or state law, unless the person to whom the privilege is owed
has voluntarily waived that privilege;
ii. evidence or testimony or questions that seek to elicit information regarding records made or
maintained by a physician, psychologist or other health care professional in connection with the
provision of treatment, unless the person to whom the privilege is owed has voluntarily waived
that confidentiality; or
iii. evidence or testimony or questions that seek to elicit information regarding the complainant's

university of richmond | 20
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
sexual interests or prior sexual conduct, unless: (a) evidence of prior sexual conduct is offered to
provide that someone other than the respondent committed the alleged conduct; or (b) the
evidence, testimony or questions relate to specific incidents of the complainant's sexual conduct
with the respondent that is offered to provide consent to the alleged sexual harassment/sexual
misconduct. however, the fact of prior consensual sexual conduct between the complainant and
respondent does not, but itself, demonstrate or imply the complainant's consent to the alleged
conduct at issue or preclude a determination of responsibility.
b. investigation of complaints of sexual harassment or sexual misconduct
1. assignment of investigator. upon receipt of a formal complaint and provided that the complainant and
respondent have not agreed to an alternative resolution process, the title ix coordinator shall conduct
the investigation or will engage a qualified and trained designee to conduct the investigation. the
investigation will be conducted in a prompt, objective, and thorough manner.
2. burden of gathering evidence. the university shall have the burden to conduct an investigation that
gathers sufficient evidence to determine whether sexual harassment/ sexual misconduct occurred.
neither the complainant nor the respondent have such a burden.
3. opportunity to present witnesses and evidence. the investigator shall provide the complainant and the
respondent with an equal opportunity to notify the investigator of fact witnesses, expert witnesses, and
to provide inculpatory and exculpatory information to the investigator that is relevant and not
impermissible under this policy. the investigator shall contact the fact witnesses identified by the
complainant and respondent and shall interview all relevant witnesses who agree to participate in the
investigation.
4. notice of meetings. the title ix coordinator or the investigator shall provide the complainant,
respondent, and any witness with written notice of the date, time, location (if not virtual), participants
and purpose of each meeting with the investigator. such notice shall be provided with sufficient time for
the complainant, respondent, or witness to prepare to participate in the meeting.
5. advisors/other persons. the complainant and the respondent may be accompanied by the advisor of
their choice during all meetings with the investigator. the advisor may, but is not required to be, an
attorney. neither the complainant or respondent may have a person other than their advisor present
during meetings with the investigator.
6. written investigative report. the investigator shall review all evidence gathered during the investigation
and shall determine what evidence is relevant and what evidence is impermissible, regardless of its
relevance. the investigative report shall not include evidence that is either irrelevant or impermissible.
the investigative report shall include, as appendices, all relevant and permissible evidence and
transcripts of interviews with the complainant, respondent and witnesses, which may be redacted to
exclude statements that are irrelevant or impermissible under this policy.
7. access and response to the investigative report and evidence.
a. access to preliminary report. the title ix coordinator shall provide both the complainant and the
respondent, and their respective advisors, with access to the preliminary investigative report and its
appendices containing relevant and permissible information.
b. other evidence. upon written request, the complainant and the respondent may inspect and review
any evidence gathered during the investigation which is not included in the preliminary investigative
report but which is directly related to the allegations in the formal complaint, including evidence

university of richmond | 21
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
upon which the university does not intend to rely in a formal resolution process and inculpatory or
exculpatory evidence obtained by the investigator from any source.
c. response to investigative report. the complainant and respondent will have ten (10) days from the
date that access to the preliminary investigative report and any other evidence was provided to submit
a written response to the preliminary investigative report and evidence which the investigator will
consider prior to completion of the final report. this time frame may be extended by the title ix
coordinator on a reasonable, case-by-case basis for good cause. the title ix coordinator will notify
the complainant and respondent, in writing, of the extension and the reason for the extension.
d. access to final report. the title ix coordinator shall provide both the complainant and the
respondent, and their respective advisors, with access to the final investigative report and its
appendices. access shall be provided at least ten (10) days prior to a hearing under the formal
resolution process.
8. time frame for investigation. the time frame for the investigation will generally be 60 to 120 days,
depending upon the complexity of the investigation. this time frame may be extended on a reasonable,
case-by-case basis for good cause. the title ix coordinator will notify the complainant and
respondent, in writing, of the extension and the reason for the extension.
9. coordination with pending criminal investigations
except in very unusual circumstances, the title ix investigation or formal resolution process will not
be delayed because of a pending criminal investigation. when an incident is reported to both the
university police and the title ix coordinator, they will share information to the extent possible and
as appropriate and will seek to avoid unnecessary burdens on the complainant or respondent.
in certain situations, law enforcement officials may request that the title ix coordinator temporarily
suspend an investigation or formal resolution process while law enforcement officials gather evidence
in a criminal investigation. the title ix coordinator will comply with such requests, but will
promptly resume the investigation or formal resolution process as soon as they are notified that the
law enforcement officials have completed gathering evidence. the suspension of the investigation or
formal resolution process under these circumstances will not limit the availability of supportive
measures or other assistance and support to a complainant, respondent, or witness.
c. alternative resolution
1. purpose of alternative resolution. alternative resolution is a voluntary process for resolving a formal
complaint of sexual harassment/sexual misconduct and is an alternative to the formal resolution
process described in this policy. alternative resolution is not available for formal complaints alleging
that a student was subjected to sexual harassment or sexual misconduct by an employee of the
university. both the complainant and the respondent must agree, in writing, to participate in an
alternative resolution process. the alternative resolution process is designed to eliminate the
reoccurrence of the prohibited conduct and provide a remedy that meets the needs of both the
complainant and respondent while maintaining the safety of the campus community. alternative
resolution provides an opportunity for the complainant and respondent to discuss the complaint and the
alleged conduct and to communicate their feelings and perceptions regarding the conduct, the impact of
the conduct, and their wishes and expectations regarding their conduct in the future.
if a mutually agreeable resolution is reached through the alternative resolution process, the matter will be
closed and there will be no formal sanction imposed, unless the respondent voluntarily agrees to accept a

university of richmond | 22
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
sanction.
2. role and discretion of the title ix coordinator. the title ix coordinator may offer the complainant
and the respondent the option of pursuing an alternative resolution process at any time following the
initiation of a formal complaint and prior to a final determination as to whether sexual
harassment/sexual misconduct occurred under the formal resolution process. the title ix coordinator
is not required to offer the option of alternative resolution and shall use their discretion to determine
whether alternative resolution is appropriate under the circumstances. in making this determination, the
title ix coordinator shall consider, among other factors, whether the alleged conduct would present a
future risk of harm to others. if the title ix coordinator decides to offer the option of alternative
resolution, the title ix coordinator shall make such offer in writing.
3. options for alternative resolution. the title ix coordinator will discuss with the complainant and
respondent the options for alternative resolution, which may include, among other options, the
following:
a. a discussion between the complainant and respondent facilitated by a university administrator
approved by the title ix coordinator; or
b. mediation conducted by a neutral, third-party mediator.
the facilitator or mediator assigned to the matter shall not be the same person who conducted or would
conduct an investigation or the decision-maker in a formal resolution process.
4. notice of alternative resolution. if the complainant and respondent agree to participate in an alternative
resolution process, the title ix coordinator shall provide each party with a written notice that contains the
following:
a. the allegations at issue;
b. a description of the alternative resolution process and its requirements;
c. a statement that the complainant and respondent each have the right, at any time prior to agreeing to
a resolution, to withdraw from the alternative resolution process and initiate or continue a formal
resolution process;
d. a statement that the parties' agreement to a resolution at the conclusion of the alternative resolution
process precludes initiating or resuming a formal complaint or the formal resolution process arising
out of the same allegations;
e. the potential terms that may be requested or offered in an alternative resolution agreement, including
notice that an alternative resolution agreement is binding only on the parties; and
f. that the university will maintain the confidentiality of information shared during the alternative
resolution process, to the extent permitted by law, and that such information shall not be used in a
subsequent formal resolution process.
5. advisors. the complainant and respondent have the right to the services of an advisor of their choice.
the advisor maybe an attorney.
a. advisors may attend any related meetings or proceedings with the respective parties.
b. the role of the advisor is to provide support, guidance and advice to the respective parties. the
respondent and complainant are responsible for presenting their own information. communication
will occur directly to the parties and they are responsible for communicating the information to their

university of richmond | 23
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
advisors.
c. the complainant and respondent should select as an advisor a person whose schedule allows for
attendance at the scheduled date and time for the alternative resolution process, as delays will not
normally be allowed due to scheduling conflicts of the advisor.
d. the complainant or respondent can waive their right to have an advisor if they so choose.
6. format of alternative resolution. at the request of either party or at the discretion of the title ix
coordinator, the alternative resolution can occur in person or with technology enabling the mediator,
parties and their respective advisors to see and hear each other.
7. alternative resolution agreement. at the conclusion of the alternative resolution process, the agreement
of the parties, if any, will be documented in a formal, written resolution agreement that must be approved
by the title ix coordinator and then signed by the complainant and respondent. the alternative
resolution agreement is binding only on the complainant and respondent.
8. termination of the alternative resolution process. the university, the complainant or the respondent
may, at any time prior to the conclusion of the alternative resolution process, elect to end such
proceedings and pursue the formal resolution process instead. in such cases, statements or disclosures
made by the parties in the course of the alternative resolution may not be considered in the subsequent
formal resolution process.
d. formal resolution process. if the parties have not agreed to or have terminated an alternative resolution
process, as described in section 3104.7(c) of this policy, and if the formal complaint has not been
dismissed by the title ix coordinator pursuant to section 3104.6(f) of this policy, the formal complaint
will be adjudicated through the university's formal resolution process.
1. student as the respondent. if the respondent is a student at the university, the formal complaint will be
adjudicated under the process set forth in the university's standards of student conduct, appendix a.
2. staff member as respondent. if the respondent is a staff member of the university, the formal
complaint will be adjudicated under the process set forth in appendix a of this policy.
3. faculty member as respondent. if the respondent is a faculty member of the university, the formal
complaint will be adjudicated under the process set forth in the faculty handbook.
4. requirements for all adjudication processes. regardless of the status of the respondent, the formal
resolution process for all formal complaints of sexual harassment/sexual misconduct shall meet the
requirements set forth in this section 3104.7(d)(4) and to the extent that there is a conflict between the
requirements of this section and another university policy, handbook or the
standards of student
conduct, the terms of this section shall govern.
a. the decision-maker. the decision-maker shall not be the title ix coordinator or the investigator.
b. questioning by decision-maker. the decision-maker shall have the ability to question the
complainant, the respondent, and all witnesses to adequately assess their credibility, to the extent
credibility is in dispute and relevant to evaluating one or more allegations of sexual
harassment/sexual misconduct.
c. questioning by the parties' advisors. the advisors for the complainant and respondent shall be
provided the opportunity to ask relevant questions and follow-up questions of the other party and all
witnesses, including those challenging credibility.

university of richmond | 24
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
d. standard of proof. the decision-maker shall use the preponderance of evidence standard of proof to
determine whether sexual harassment/sexual misconduct occurred.
e. relevant and not impermissible evidence. the decision-maker shall consider only evidence and
testimony that is relevant and not impermissible, as described in this policy.
f. notice of determination and right of appeal. the decision maker shall notify the complainant and
the respondent, in writing, of the determination as to whether sexual harassment/sexual misconduct
occurred. such notice shall be provided to the complainant and respondent at the same time and
shall include the following:
i. identification of the allegations potentially constituting sexual harassment/sexual misconduct;
ii. a description of the procedural steps taken from the initiation of the formal complaint through
the determination following the hearing;
iii. the findings of fact supporting the determination of the decision-maker;
iv. conclusions regarding the application of the university's policies, including the standards of
student conduct, to the facts;
v. a statement of and rationale for the result as to each allegation, including a determination
regarding responsibility, any sanctions imposed on the respondent, and any remedies provided to
the complainant to restore or preserve access to the university's education program and activity
or access to the benefits or privileges of employment; and
vi. the process and basis for filing an appeal.
g. imposition of sanctions. the university shall not impose disciplinary sanctions on a respondent
unless there is a determination following the conclusion of the formal resolution process that the
respondent engaged in conduct prohibited by this policy, or the respondent voluntarily agreed to
such sanctions as part of an alternative resolution process. additionally, the university shall not
impose any disciplinary sanction for making false statements solely on the basis of the decision-
maker's determination that sexual harassment/sexual misconduct occurred.
h. role of the title ix coordinator. if the decision-maker determines that sexual harassment/sexual
misconduct occurred, the title ix coordinator, as appropriate, shall:
i. coordinate the provision and implementation of remedies to the complainant and any other
person that the university identifies has having had equal access to the university's education
program or activity or equal access to the benefits or privileges of employment limited or denied
by the respondent's conduct;
ii. coordinate, in collaboration with other university officials, the imposition of sanctions against
the respondent, including the notification to the complainant of any such sanctions, to the extent
legally permissible; and
iii. take other appropriate, prompt, and effective steps intended to ensure that sexual
harassment/sexual misconduct does not continue or recur within the university's education
programs or activity.
e. confidentiality
obligations of the university. the university will use reasonable efforts to maintain the confidentiality
of personally identifiable information obtained in the course of responding to a formal complaint under

university of richmond | 25
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
this policy except as permitted in this policy or permitted or required by applicable law.
f. retaliation
1. retaliation is prohibited
the university prohibits retaliation, in any form, against an individual who reports, in good faith, an
actual, potential or suspected violation of this policy. as used in this policy, reporting "in good faith"
means the individual making the report has a reasonable basis to believe that there has been or may have
been a violation of this policy. individuals who make frivolous or false reports shall not be deemed to be
acting in good faith.
the university also prohibits retaliation, in any form, against an individual who initiates a complaint,
participated in or refused to participate in an investigation, informal or formal resolution process, served
as a witness in an investigation or hearing, or sought or initiated supportive measures under this policy.
2. response to alleged retaliation. the university will respond to information about conduct that
reasonably may constitute retaliation or to a complaint alleging retaliation in accordance with the
procedures and requirements set forth in this policy.
related policies:
gov-1004 policy prohibiting retaliation
gov-3101 policy prohibiting discrimination
gov-3108 policy on prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination – students
gov-3107 policy on prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination – faculty and staff
gov-3103 policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment/sexual misconduct – students
gov-3106 policy prohibiting and responding to discrimination based on protected status- faculty and staff
gov-3102 policy prohibiting and responding to discrimination based on protected status – students
gov-3105 title ix coordinator's policy
standards of student conduct
sec-2006 timely warning policy
faculty handbook
policy background:
the august 2020 version this policy includes major revisions to be in compliance with the final rule for non-
discrimination on the basis of sex in education programs or activities receiving federal financial assistance
(title ix) issued from the department of education on may 19, 2020.
the august 2021 version of this policy makes the august 2020 interim policy final.
minor revisions made to the policy in september 2021; revised policy effective 10/1/21.
the revision for the 2022-23 school year including updating the domestic violence definition to reflect the
reauthorization of the violence against women's act (vawa) and minor revisions to correct drafting
errors.
non-substantive revisions made for 2023-2024 school year to update links and contacts made in august
2023.

university of richmond | 26
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
this policy was updated in december 2024 to reflect an amendment to the university's non-discrimination
statement approved by the university of richmond board of trustees on december 6, 2024.
this policy was revised in august 2024 to narrow its scope to reports or formal complaints of sexual
harassment and sexual misconduct. the university's procedures for responding to reports or complaints of
sex discrimination and discrimination and harassment based on protected status are set forth in the university's
policy prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination and its policy prohibiting and responding to
discrimination based on protected status. at the time this policy update was finalized, there were two federal
court injunctions temporarily enjoining the implementation and enforcement of title ix regulations issued by
the department of education in april 2024. as a result, the 2020 version of the title ix regulations remain
applicable to this policy. this policy was reviewed to ensure continued compliance with the 2020 title ix
regulations, title vii and its implementing regulations, and the clery act and its implementing regulations. it
was also updated to include certain procedures set forth in the 2024 title ix regulations that were not in conflict
with the 2020 regulations.
this policy was updated in september 2025 to reflect the fbi's uniform crime reporting system.
policy contacts:
director of compliance and title ix coordinator
deputy title ix and non-discrimination coordinator for students
chief human resource officer & deputy title ix coordinator for faculty & staff

university of richmond | 27
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
appendix a
formal resolution process for staff respondents
a. rights and responsibilities of the parties. the complainant and respondent shall be afforded the
following rights and responsibilities throughout the formal resolution process:
1. hearing. the parties have the right to a live hearing, conducted in accordance with the procedures set
forth in this appendix. at the discretion of the hearing officer, the hearing may be conducted with all
parties, advisors, and witnesses physically present in the same location or any or all parties, advisors, and
witnesses may appear virtually with technology enabling participants to simultaneously see and hear each
other. the hearing will be recorded and a transcript of the hearing shall be made available to the parties
for inspection and review.
2. evidence. the parties have the right to a hearing based on reliable evidence presented during the hearing
process, including reasonable inferences drawn from such evidence, and reasonable determinations by
the fact finder as to the credibility of witness testimony. the burden of proof and the burden of gathering
evidence sufficient to reach a determination regarding responsibility shall rest with the university and not
the parties to the hearing.
3. advisors. the parties each have the right to the services of an advisor of their choice at a hearing and
during any appeal. the parties are responsible for presenting their own information, and therefore,
advisors are not permitted to present evidence, make oral arguments or statements or raise objections
during a hearing. the advisor will be responsible for conducting cross examination on behalf of the party
they are advising during the hearing. an advisor may request a brief recess of the proceedings to provide
advice to the respondent.
each party should select as an advisor a person whose schedule allows attendance at the scheduled date
and time for the hearing board hearing, as delays normally will not be allowed due to the scheduling
conflicts of an advisor.
if a party does not have an advisor present at the hearing, the university will provide an advisor of the
university's choice, at no cost or fee to the party to conduct cross-examination on behalf of the party.
such advisor may be, but is not required to be, an attorney.
4. right not to participate. each party has the right to not participate in any meetings, proceedings,
interviews or the hearing. the hearing board cannot draw an inference about the determination
regarding responsibility based solely on the party's absence at a hearing or refusal to submit to cross
examination
5. notice of hearing. the hearing officer shall prepare and deliver to the parties a notice of hearing. such
notice may be delivered to each party in person, by electronic mail, by u.s. mail, or by campus mail. the
date of the hearing shall not be less than seven (7) business days from the date of such notice. the time
frame for conducting the hearing may be extended by the hearing officer, for good cause and upon

university of richmond | 28
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
written notice to the respondent and complainant setting forth the reason for the extension. the notice
of hearing shall include:
a. the name of the complainant and respondent;
b. the date, time, and location of the hearing;
c. a description of the alleged sexual harassment/sexual misconduct at issue;
d. the date, and place of the alleged sexual harassment/sexual misconduct (if known);
e. the name of the hearing officer;
f. the names and titles of the voting members of the hearing board;
6. objections to investigative report. each party has the right to provide the hearing officer or their
designee with their respective objections to the final title ix investigative report prior to the hearing to
be included in the hearing record.
7. witnesses.
a. witness lists. each party has the right to call expert and/or fact witnesses at the hearing whose
testimony is relevant to the issues before the hearing board and not otherwise impermissible under
this policy and provided the lists of such witnesses is submitted to the hearing officer or their
designee as specified in section b(2) of this appendix. each party has the right to access the list of
witnesses that the hearing board and/or the other party intend to call at the hearing.
b. witness statements. if a non-party witness is not available or willing to testify at the hearing, such
witness may submit a written statement. the parties will be provided an opportunity to review, but
not copy, any written witness statements three (3) business days prior to the hearing. in order to
ensure the confidentiality of the hearing and to protect the privacy rights of the parties and other
witnesses, the respondent/complainant shall not copy, reproduce, disseminate or disclose to anyone
other than their advisor any such witness statements and shall return such witness statements to the
hearing officer at the conclusion of the hearing. following the hearing, the hearing officer shall
permit the respondent/complainant to have access to such witness statements to the extent needed
for any appeal conducted under this policy.
8. documentary, electronic, and other evidence. each party has the right to offer documentary, electronic
and other evidence that is relevant to the issues before the hearing board and not otherwise
impermissible. subject to applicable privacy laws, each party has the right to review all documentary,
electronic, and other evidence that the hearing board and/or the other party intend to present at the
hearing. neither party shall copy, reproduce, disseminate, or disclose to anyone, other than their advisor,
any such evidence and shall return such evidence to the hearing officer or their designee at the
conclusion of the hearing.

university of richmond | 29
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
9. attendance at the hearing. each party and their respective advisors have the right to attend the entire
hearing except for the deliberations of the hearing board and the verbal notifications of the outcome by
the hearing officer to the to the other party.
10. questions for witnesses. each party has the right to submit to the hearing officer a list of questions that
the party wishes the hearing officer to ask any witness who gives oral testimony. if a party chooses to
submit their initial list of questions to the hearing officer or their designee, they should be submitted two
(2) business days prior to the commencement of the hearing. notwithstanding the foregoing, the advisor
for each party may, directly, orally, and in real time, ask the other party and any witnesses called by the
other party or the hearing board, relevant and not otherwise impermissible questions and follow-up
questions, including those challenging credibility. the hearing board shall use their reasonable
discretion in determining the relevance or appropriateness of any proposed question submitted by a party
or posed by an advisor on behalf of a party and the hearing officer shall not be obligated to ask or permit
all of the questions proposed by the party or their advisor. the hearing board shall comply with this
policy in determining the relevance of proposed questions and explaining any ruling on relevance. where
appropriate, a party may request a brief recess of the hearing to prepare such questions. the hearing
officer, in their reasonable discretion, may grant or deny such request.
11. failure to attend hearing. each party has the responsibility to attend the scheduled hearing. if a party,
without valid excuse or authorization from the hearing officer, fails to attend the hearing as scheduled,
the hearing board may proceed in the party's absence to a determination of the matter, and if
appropriate, impose sanctions. if a party's advisor fails to attend the hearing as scheduled, the university
will appoint an advisor of its choice, at no cost or fee, to the respondent for the sole purpose of
conducting cross-examination on behalf of such party. if a party's advisor fails to attend the hearing, the
hearing will be recessed until such time that the university can provide an alternative advisor on behalf
of such party.
12. notice of outcome. each party has the right to written notice of the outcome of the hearing board
hearing, and the notice shall be provided to the respondent and the complainant simultaneously by 5:00
pm on the fifth (5th) business day following the conclusion of the hearing. the hearing officer in their
discretion can extend this timeline for good cause and with written notice to the parties. the notice of
outcome shall include a description of the appeal rights of the respondent and complainant under this
appendix. the parties also has the right to written notice of any change in the outcome or sanctions
imposed and notice as to when such outcome and sanctions shall be deemed final.
b. hearing procedures.
1. appointment of hearing board. the title ix coordinator shall select three (3) members of the
university hearing board pool to serve on a hearing board to consider the charges against the
respondent. the hearing board will also include a qualified, non-voting hearing officer, who shall be
responsible for the orderly conduct of the hearing and who agrees, in writing, to maintain the

university of richmond | 30
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
confidentiality of the proceedings. the title ix coordinator shall use reasonable efforts to ensure that
the hearing board members and hearing officer have no bias for or against the complainant or
respondent in the case at hand or complainants or respondents generally. the respondent and the
complainant have the right to petition that any member of the hearing board or the hearing officer be
removed on the basis of bias or conflict of interest.
2. pre-hearing submission deadlines.
a. submission of witness lists. the respondent and complainant shall provide the hearing officer or
their designee their respective lists of witnesses by 5:00 p.m. on the seventh (7) business day before
the hearing.
b. submission of documentary, electronic, and other evidence. the respondent and complainant
shall submit copies of all documentary, electronic, or other evidence to the hearing officer or their
designee by 5:00 p.m. on the fourth (4th) business day before the hearing.
c. statement of objections to the title ix investigative report. the complainant and respondent shall
provide the hearing board with their respective objections to the final title ix investigative report, if
any, by 5:00 pm on the fourth (4th) business day before the hearing.
d. access to other party's pre-hearing submissions. upon receipt of a pre-hearing submission from
either the complainant or the respondent, the hearing officer or their designee shall provide the
other party with access to such submission as soon as reasonably possible and in no event, later than
one (1) business day following the submission.
e. hearing board witnesses, documentary, electronic, and other evidence. the hearing officer or
their designee shall provide the respondent and complainant with access to the list of witnesses to be
called by the hearing board and any documentary, electronic, or other evidence not included in the
investigative report at least third (3) business days prior to the hearing.
f. removal of hearing board member. a party seeking the removal of a hearing board member must
submit a written petition to the title ix coordinator four (4) business days prior to the scheduled
hearing stating the reasons for such request. the title ix coordinator shall respond to such request,
in writing, within two (2) business days of receipt of the request.
g. questions for witnesses. the respondent and complainant may submit their respective lists of
questions for witnesses to the hearing officer or their designee at least two (2) business day prior to
the commencement of the hearing.
h. notification of advisor for purposes of cross-examination. the respondent or complainant shall
notify the title ix coordinator ten (10) business days in advance of the hearing if they need the
university to provide an advisor for purposes of cross-examination at the hearing.
i. request for hearing to occur via video conferencing. the respondent, complainant, or title ix
coordinator has the right to request the hearing before the hearing board be conducted via video
conferencing. the hearing officer, hearing board, complainant, respondent and any witnesses

university of richmond | 31
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
must be able to see and hear the party or witness providing testimony. the request for the hearing to
occur via video conferencing must be made ten (10) business days in advance of the hearing.
j. extension of submission deadlines. the hearing officer may extend the time frame for submitting
evidence, witness lists, and witness questions, at their sole discretion, and only for good cause. if
timelines are extended, the hearing officer or their designee shall provide written notice to the
parties.
3. pre-hearing procedures.
a. the respondent shall be afforded the opportunity to meet (in person, by telephone or
videoconference) with the hearing officer or their designee prior to the hearing. the purpose of this
meeting is to advise the respondent of the hearing procedures and their rights in connection with the
hearing. the respondent's advisor is permitted to attend this meeting.
b. the complainant shall be afforded the opportunity to meet (in person, by telephone or
videoconference) with the hearing officer prior to the hearing. the purpose of this meeting is to
advise the complainant of the hearing procedures and their rights in connection with the hearing. the
complainant's advisor is permitted to attend this meeting.
c. the hearing officer shall review all written materials prior to submission to the university hearing
board to ensure that the hearing record does not contain irrelevant, unfairly prejudicial, or
inadmissible information. the hearing officer will call these matters to the attention of the hearing
board for a determination on relevancy and permissibility.
4. the hearing record.
a. the hearing officer or their designee shall create a hearing record comprising the following:
i. the investigative report with its attachments; and
ii. the documentary, electronic, and other evidence submitted by the hearing board, the
complainant (if applicable), and the respondent (if applicable).
b. the hearing officer or their designee shall provide the hearing board, the complainant, and the
respondent with access to the hearing record two (2) business days prior to the hearing.
i. the hearing officer or their designee shall ensure that there are sufficient copies of the hearing
record available during the hearing for all hearing board members, the respondent and their
advisor, the complainant and their advisor and for testifying witnesses to use during their
testimony.
ii. the hearing officer or their designee shall convene one or more pre-hearing meetings of the
members of the hearing board to review the charge(s), to go over the contents of the hearing
record, and to answer any procedural questions. this meeting shall be held at least one (1)
business day prior to the hearing.

university of richmond | 32
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
5. general rules for conducting the hearing.
a. closed hearing. hearing board hearings are closed to the public. the hearing officer will control
admission of persons to the hearing. any person not a party or witness in the hearing will be
prohibited from attending the hearing. the complainant and respondent, and their respective
advisors, shall have the right to attend the entire hearing, except for the deliberations of the hearing
board.
b. the hearing officer. the hearing officer shall preside over and conduct the hearing and has the
authority described herein.
i. the hearing officer may appoint a recording secretary or other staff member as needed. the
hearing officer shall also arrange for the preparation of a transcript of the hearing, excluding the
deliberations of the hearing board. the hearing will be audio recorded.
ii. the hearing officer may order any person in attendance that does not conduct themselves in an
orderly and respectful manner to leave. obstructive, contemptuous, disruptive or noisy conduct in
the presence of the hearing board by any person, including the respondent, the complainant, a
witness, or an advisor, may result in that person being removed from the hearing. if a party's
advisor is removed from a hearing pursuant to this section, the hearing will be recessed until such
time that the university can provide an alternate advisor of the university's choice at no cost or
fee to the party, in order to conduct cross examination on behalf of that party;
iii. the hearing officer shall advise the hearing board in its duties to control the questioning of the
respondent, the complainant, and any witnesses by hearing board members, the respondent or
their advisor, and the complainant or their advisor to protect witnesses from improper or irrelevant
questions, insulting treatment, and unnecessary inquiry into their private affairs.
iv. the hearing officer may exclude witnesses from the hearing room except when they are
testifying.
c. general procedural rules of the hearing board.
i. all members of the hearing board must be present throughout the hearing.
ii. if a member of the hearing board must leave before the hearing is complete with good cause, the
hearing officer may at their sole discretion recess the hearing and reconvene the hearing within
one (1) business day.
iii. if a voting member disqualifies themselves or for good cause they must withdraw from the
hearing, the hearing officer or their designee shall select a replacement from the hearing board
pool. the hearing officer shall, after consultation with the respondent and the complainant in
open session, provide the replacement with a summary of all prior proceedings.
iv. no person shall address the hearing board or submit questions to the hearing officer for any
witness (including the respondent, the complainant or an advisor) without first being recognized
by the hearing officer.

university of richmond | 33
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
6. order of the hearing.
a. summary of allegations and respondent's plea. the hearing officer shall read a summary of the
alleged sexual harassment/sexual misconduct at issue and the respondent shall state whether they
accept or deny responsibility for such alleged conduct.
i. in the absence of a response, the respondent shall be deemed not to have accepted responsibility
for the alleged misconduct.
ii. if the respondent does not accept responsibility for the alleged sexual harassment/sexual
misconduct, evidence, and/or witness testimony admitted by the hearing board shall be presented
that support or refute such allegation.
iii. if the respondent accepts responsibility for the charge(s), evidence, witness testimony, admitted
by the hearing board shall be presented that will assist the hearing board in determining a
recommended sanction.
b. standard of evidence. the hearing officer shall remind all parties that the standard of evidence is
preponderance of the evidence, or the greater weight of the evidence presented at the hearing. it is
that evidence that the finders of fact find most persuasive. a preponderance, or the greater weight of
the evidence, is a matter of quality, not quantity. the testimony of one witness who is found to be
credible can, for example, be greater than the weight of two witnesses who have no first-hand
knowledge or poor recollections of the event in question.
c. opening statements. the respondent and complainant shall be provided an opportunity to make an
opening statement.
d. procedures for oral testimony / presentation of evidence.
i. the title ix coordinator shall not testify as a witness.
ii. the investigator may be called to testify as a witness.
iii. the respondent, the complainant and all witnesses shall testify under oath or affirmation.
i. the members of the hearing board shall be given the opportunity to ask questions of the
respondent, complainant, and all witnesses.
ii. the hearing officer will ask questions submitted by the party calling the witness.
iii. the advisor for the respondent and complainant shall conduct cross-examination on behalf of
their respective party. advisors shall have the opportunity to cross examine the other party,
witnesses called by the other party, and witnesses called by the hearing board. any party or
witness may choose not to offer evidence or submit to cross-examination at the hearing, either
because they do not attend the hearing, or because they attend but refuse to participate in cross-
examination. the hearing board can only rely on whatever relevant evidence is available through
the investigation and hearing in making the ultimate determination of responsibility. the hearing
board may not draw inference solely from a party's or witness's absence from the hearing or

university of richmond | 34
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
refusal to submit to cross-examination. the advisor cannot yell, berate or talk over the party/witness
when conducting cross-examination.
iv. the members of the hearing board shall have the opportunity to ask questions of the parties and
all witnesses.
iv. the members of the hearing board shall direct the hearing officer to call witnesses and/or
present evidence.
v. the respondent and complainant shall have the opportunity to testify, present evidence, and call
witnesses.
e. closing statements. prior to the initial deliberations by the hearing board, the respondent and
complainant shall be given the opportunity to make a closing statement to the hearing board. this
statement shall not address the impact of the incident, the investigation or the hearing, on the
respondent or complainant.
f. hearing board deliberations. the hearing officer will excuse all parties so that the members of the
hearing board may deliberate in private on the issue of responsibility for the charges at issue.
g. initial notification to the parties. after deliberations on the issue of responsibility are completed, the
hearing officer shall meet separately with the respondent and complainant to notify them of the
decision of the hearing board on the issue of responsibility.
h. impact statements. if the hearing board finds the respondent responsible for the charges at issue, the
hearing will be reconvened after the notice required herein. the respondent and complainant will
each have an opportunity to make an impact statement to the hearing board regarding the issue of
sanctions and the impact of the conduct on them.
i. deliberations on sanctions. the hearing officer will excuse all parties so that the members of the
hearing board may deliberate in private on the issue of sanctions.
j. initial notification of sanctions. after deliberations on the issue of sanctions are completed, the
hearing officer shall meet separately with the respondent, to notify the respondent of the sanctions
recommended by the hearing board and the effective date of such sanctions. the hearing officer
will meet separately with the complainant and notify them of the sanctions that relate directly to their
complaint.
k. written notification of finding and sanctions/appeal rights. the hearing officer will also provide
information to the respondent and complainant related to written notification of the decision and
appeal rights.
l. adjournment. the hearing officer will adjourn the hearing.

university of richmond | 35
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
7. deliberations of the hearing board.
a. the voting members of the hearing board shall deliberate in private and reach a decision based only
upon the evidence introduced at the hearing. the hearing officer is present during the deliberation,
but does not have a vote.
b. the members of hearing board shall not make any finding of fact that is not supported by the
evidence presented at the hearing. in making findings of fact the members of the hearing board shall
apply the preponderance of evidence standard.
c. if a majority of hearing board members find the respondent responsible for the alleged sexual
harassment/sexual misconduct, the recommendation of the hearing board shall be that the
respondent be found responsible.
d. if the respondent is found responsible, the recommended sanction generally shall be determined in
accordance with section d of this appendix. the hearing officer will notify both parties of the
agreed upon sanction.
e. the respondent and complainant have the right to a written notice of outcome and sanctions (if
applicable) of the hearing board hearing including:
i. identification of the allegations;
ii. a description of the procedural steps taken from the receipt of the formal complaint through the
determination including notifications to the parties, interviews with parties and witnesses, site
visits, methods used to gather other evidence, and hearings;
iii. findings of fact supporting the determination;
iv. conclusions regarding the application of this policy to the facts;
v. a statement of, and rationale for, the result as to each allegation, including a determination
regarding responsibility;
vi. a listing of all relevancy determinations made during the hearing;
vii. disciplinary sanctions (if any) imposed on the respondent;
viii. remedies (if any) that will be provided to the complainant designed to restore or preserve equal
access to the university's education program or activity; and
ix. the basis and procedures for an appeal.
the written notice of outcome shall be furnished to the respondent and the complainant simultaneously.
8. advice and assistance for the hearing officer and hearing board. at any time during the formal
resolution process, the hearing officer and the hearing board may seek advice and assistance from the
title ix coordinator, the university's general counsel, or their designee. such advice and guidance
shall generally be limited to procedural matters, interpretative matters, or legal matters and shall not go to
the ultimate issues of responsibility or the appropriate sanction.

university of richmond | 36
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
c. sanctions. in cases where there is a finding of responsibility for sexual misconduct or sexual harassment by
the hearing board, that same board will make a determination regarding appropriate sanctions in accordance
with the university's progressive discipline policy.
d. appeal of findings
1. grounds for appeal. the respondent or a complainant, may only appeal a finding of the hearing
board on the following grounds:
a. procedural irregularity that affected the outcome of the matter;
b. new evidence that was not reasonably available at the time of the determination regarding
responsibility was made that could affect the outcome of the matter;
c. the title ix coordinator, investigator(s), or hearing board member(s) had a conflict of interest or
bias for or against complainants or respondents generally or the individual respondent or complainant
that affected the outcome.
2. filing an appeal. a complainant or respondent wishing to appeal the findings of the hearing board, must
file a written appeal with the executive vice president and chief operating officer of the university, with
a copy to the title ix coordinator. the appeal must be filed within five (5) working days from the date the
complainant and respondent were notified of the findings and sanctions.
the appeal must include the following:
• the basis for the appeal, which must be detailed and consistent with the grounds for appeal set forth
above; and
• any factual information supporting the basis for the appeal.
• both the complainant and the respondent will be provided a reasonable and equal opportunity to
submit a written statement in support of or challenging the appeal.
3. appeal committee. the appeal will be considered by an appeal committee of three or more members of
the university hearing board pool. the respondent and, where applicable, the complainant, has the
right to petition that any member of the appeal committee be removed on the basis of bias or conflict of
interest. the executive vice president and chief operating officer shall respond to such request, in
writing.
the committee may elect to seek additional information from the title ix coordinator, the respondent or
the complainant's supervisor and any other person(s) it deems necessary for a full review of the facts.
the committee will make a recommendation based upon a standard of clear and convincing evidence to
the executive vice president for business and chief operating officer. the decision of the executive
vice president and chief operating officer to approve, disapprove, or modify the recommendation shall
be final.
the decision on a request for an appeal shall be made within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the appeal,
unless there is good cause for a reasonable extension of this time period. in which event, the title ix
coordinator shall provide written notice to the respondent, and the complaint setting forth the reason for
the extension.

university of richmond | 37
gov-3104 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment / sexual
misconduct –faculty and staff
upon reaching a decision on a request for an appeal, the executive vice president and chief operating
officer shall provide written notification of their decision to the respondent, the complainant, and to the
title ix coordinator.