university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
the purpose of this policy is to ensure that the university of richmond can support students in need of
financial assistance while at the same time ensuring appropriate stewardship of university resources and
compliance with federal limits on aid to students and other applicable laws and policies.
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right
to elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
index:
fin-2101.1 ........policy
policy statement:
fin-2101.1– policy
the only office that may provide financial aid to students is the university's office of financial aid.
financial aid is defined as the provision of institutional resources from any source to support tuition, fees,
housing, books and course supplies, meal plan or financial assistance for food to students living on or off-
campus. meals associated with university-sponsored events or programs are not considered financial aid.
gift cards may not be given to students except in limited situations related to research, pre-approved by the
university controller. see fin-1100 policy on gifts, prizes, and awards.
students pursuing university-sponsored research or internships (including those funded by sponsored
research) must be paid through student payroll if the mentor/supervisor is a university faculty or staff
member.
policy #: fin-2101
policy title: policy on provision of financial resources to
students
effective: 01/01/2025 responsible office: office of the university controller
date
approved:
12/18/2024 approval: executive vice president and chief operating
officer
replaces
policy dated:
07/01/2019 responsible
university official:
senior associate vice president and university
controller

fin-2101 – policy on provision of financial resources to students
university of richmond | 2
reimbursements or direct payments for student books or course supplies are not permitted except when such
costs have not been covered in cost of attendance and the payments are authorized appropriately as outlined
in this policy.
reimbursements or direct payments for individual student meal expenses during travel may not exceed
federal meal per diem limits, and offices may not support student travel unless their office is the sponsor of
the trip or program. all student reimbursements require receipts including reimbursements for amounts that
comply with the federal per diem rates.
students may be paid for work through payroll based on hourly timekeeping; honoraria or stipends are not
permitted.
payments to students may be authorized only by certain offices and in limited circumstances. typically
approval is required from a dean or vice president. [see exhibit 1] in addition, payments to students other
than through payroll or the ursf program must be approved by a student expense approver (typically in
financial aid), and payments to international students must be approved by international tax and may be
reduced for tax withholding.
no other office may provide payments to students or aid in other forms, such as meal plans or housing.
exhibit 1
the following offices are authorized to provide payments to students under limited circumstances described
below. funds for students are not guaranteed, but payments are permissible under the following
circumstances if the student fits the eligibility criteria for the program or funding source:
• deans of richmond/westhampton colleges
o reimbursement of students for goods/services purchased related to student activities in the
colleges. whenever possible, such activities should be paid for directly by the university, so as
to avoid the need for student reimbursements.
• vice president for enrollment management
o in consultation with the appropriate deans and the office of financial aid, the vice president
for enrollment management may assist students with unique circumstances that are not included
in cost of attendance (emergency funds).
• deans of schools and provost:
o expenses associated with travel for curricular or course-related activities, including academic
conferences, academic competitions, or course-related research or artistic production. expenses
for individual student travel-related meals cannot exceed federal per diem limits, and students
may not be reimbursed for standard course-related supplies and expenses.
o summer research or internship awards sponsored by the school, according to the policies of the
program and university policy. research or internships supervised by a university faculty or
staff member must be paid through university payroll.
o meals and other incidental expenses associated with student activities (e.g., lunch during a
student-sponsored speaker series). whenever possible, such activities should be paid for directly
by the university, so as to avoid the need for student reimbursements. (associate dean of
students in law school may also approve)

fin-2101 – policy on provision of financial resources to students
university of richmond | 3
• deans of schools and vice presidents
o academic and other awards that are required by an endowment agreement to include cash
payment. departments and others may select student recipients, per the terms of the award, but
only deans or vps may authorize payment, and the amount may be reduced as needed to comply
with federal tax and financial aid regulations.
o summer research or internship awards provided by the law school (law dean)
• ursf program directors, director of scholars and fellowships, bonner scholars program director
o summer research or internship awards per guidelines of ursf or bonner scholars program.
research or internships supervised by a university faculty or staff member must be paid through
university payroll.
o expenses associated with travel for conferences and activities associated with scholars or
fellowship activity, including approved use of richmond scholar stipends; payments for
individual student meal expenses associated with travel cannot exceed federal meal per diem
limits.
• dean of international education
o weinstein grant funds per the guidelines of the weinstein grant program and awarded through
the ursf program process.
o reimbursement of expenses related to cultural experiences per the guidelines of the trader fund.
o expenses associated with travel for curricular or co-curricular activities; payments for individual
student meal expenses associated with travel cannot exceed federal per diem limits. whenever
possible, such activities should be paid for directly by the university, so as to avoid the need for
student reimbursements.
• vp student development and director, center for student involvement
o expenses associated with travel for co-curricular or extra-curricular conference or competitions;
payments for individual student meal expenses associated with travel cannot exceed federal per
diem limits. (assoc. vp, health and wellness may also approve)
o reimbursement of expenses related to domestic cultural experiences per the guidelines of the
dupont fund.
o reimbursement of students for goods/services purchased related to student activities. whenever
possible, such activities should be paid for directly by the university, so as to avoid the need for
student reimbursements.
• director, career development center
limited support for expenses associated with interviews or application for a job or graduate program,
per the guidelines of the career opportunity funds program:
o interview clothing;
o graduate school application fees, if waivers are not available;
o interview travel costs in certain circumstances if employer/graduate school is not covering
interview costs and interview is required;

fin-2101 – policy on provision of financial resources to students
university of richmond | 4
o costs associated with graduate school admission exams if waivers are not available. payments
for test preparation for individual students are not permissible, though an office or school may
sponsor such classes.
• athletics (athletic director and asst. athletic director for finance and operations only)
o reimbursements to students for travel, meal or other expenses permissible under university
policy and ncaa rules;
o reimbursements for books and course supplies, if such amounts have not been included in
student financial aid awards and such expenses are permissible under university policy and
ncaa rules.
• payroll / office of student employment
o payment for work;
o payments to students for faculty-mentored summer research and internships supervised by
university staff or faculty members.
in the unusual circumstance in which an office other than those listed above has a need to make a payment to
a student, the payment must be approved by the vice president for student development (for activities
occurring within student development) or evp/provost (for activities that occur outside of student
development) with appropriate consultation with the office of financial aid.
related policies:
fin-1100 policy on gifts, prizes, and awards
policy background:
academic deans and president's cabinet reviewed this policy before it was approved on 12/18/2024.
academic deans and president's cabinet reviewed this policy before it was approved on 06/13/2019.
policy contacts:
vice president for enrollment management
senior associate vice president and university controller