university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
the purpose of this policy is to establish the framework for hiring or reassigning university of richmond
employees to perform work outside the commonwealth of virginia, and to ensure the university's
compliance with state and local tax law, workers compensation and similar insurance requirements, and other
relevant laws.
scope:
this policy applies to faculty, staff and student employees of the university of richmond and its affiliates
(collectively, the university) who work and reside outside of the commonwealth of virginia, but in the
united states. it is university policy not to hire employees based outside of the united states, and this policy
does not apply to employees residing and working outside of the united states.
this policy does not apply to university employees residing in virginia whose job responsibilities require out
of state business travel for short periods of time, nor does it apply to faculty who are on sabbatical outside
virginia.
this policy does not apply to students residing and working out of state as part of the ur summer fellowship
program.
policy #: hrm-4004
policy title: policy for employment of out of state
residents
effective: 02/01/2025 responsible office: human resources
date
approved:
02/01/2025 approval: executive vice president chief operating
officer
replaces
policy dated:
n/a responsible
university official:
chief human resources officer

hrm-4004 – policy for employment of out of state residents
university of richmond | 2
index:
hrm-4004.1 .....policy statement
hrm-4004.2 .....travel reimbursements
hrm-4004.3…..related policies
appendix……...operational procedures
policy statement:
hrm-4004.1 – policy
the university's mission necessitates that most of its faculty and staff perform their work in richmond or in
the commonwealth of virginia. occasionally, however, the university may have a compelling business need
that can be met only by hiring or reassigning an employee to reside and perform their work outside of
virginia. the university reserves the right to determine whether, based on a compelling university business
need, it will permit an individual residing outside of virginia to become or continue to be employed by the
university.
employees are subject to the laws of the state in which they reside, and these taxes, labor and employment
laws, and workers compensation provisions vary from state to state. university employees who reside outside
virginia may also trigger additional legal, regulatory and compliance obligations beyond those relating to
employment. therefore, the hiring or reassignment of employees who reside outside of virginia must serve
an important university business purpose and not be merely an accommodation to the employee.
review and approval of requests for employment of individuals residing outside of virginia will be evaluated
on the basis of several factors, including business and operational necessity and the availability of qualified
virginia residents to fill the role. each request must be approved by the relevant vice-president or dean; the
chief human resources officer in consultation with the senior associate vice president, finance and
controller and the vice president and general counsel will make the final determination.
at this time, non-exempt employees are not permitted to work outside of virginia, with the exception of post-
baccalaureate and post-doctoral researchers. as of the effective date, no individual who resides outside of
virginia may be hired or begin employment until approval is received.
hrm-4004.2 — travel reimbursements
employees with approved out-of-state work arrangements may be required to report to campus (or
occasionally, an alternate off-campus location) to attend meetings, trainings, or similar events of a defined
duration, or to receive additional performance support or guidance. when an employee with such an
arrangement is asked by their department or unit to report to campus, the following will apply:
• for employees whose primary work location (usually their residence) is located outside a 150-mile
radius of campus, the university may cover or reimburse the employee, in accordance with applicable
university policies, for reasonable costs associated with travel to and from campus.

hrm-4004 – policy for employment of out of state residents
university of richmond | 3
• for employees whose primary work location (usually their residence) is located within a 150-mile radius
of campus, those individuals are responsible for the costs associated with their travel to and from
campus.
hrm-4004.3 — reimbursement of employee expenses
employees with approved out-of-state work arrangements are expected to maintain an appropriate office
environment suitable for the conduct of university business. employees may be reimbursed for the ordinary
and necessary business expenditures incurred within the employee's scope of employment and directly related
to services performed for the university.
related policies:
hrm – 1002: flexible work arrangement policy
policy contacts:
chief human resources officer
senior associate vice-president for finance & controller

hrm-4004 – policy for employment of out of state residents
university of richmond | 4
appendix
operational procedures:
new positions and new hires:
before posting a position that may be eligible to be permanently based outside of virginia, the hiring manager
shall do the following:
1. the manager must seek approval from the relevant division head or dean to post the position as
eligible for full time remote work.
2. the manager must then submit a request to human resources to permit full time remote work
for the position. the request must explain the reasons and justify the business necessity for a
fully remote position.
3. the request will then be reviewed by chief human resources officer, the university controller,
risk management, and office of university counsel.
4. if approved, human resources will provide the manager with a list of pre-approved states in
which recruiting for the remote work position may take place.
5. manager may then post the position.
once the position is posted and the manager has complied with previous steps:
1. if the hiring manager wishes to hire an employee located in a state that is not listed on the pre-
approved list of states:
a. a talent acquisition specialist will discuss with the candidate whether they are willing
to relocate.
b. if the candidate is unwilling to relocate, manager shall submit a request to human
resources, seeking permission to hire an employee in that state. this request will then
be reviewed by chief human resources officer, the university controller, risk
management, and office of university counsel.
2. no offer shall be made to an out-of-state candidate until the manager has received approval to
hire in that state (either as a pre-approval or through step 1(b) above).
if an employee is approved to work in a state that is not on the pre-approved list, the employee's
start date will be delayed until the university completes all necessary steps to be in compliance
with that state's laws and regulations. note that for states not already on the approved list or
states on the approved list but where the university has not yet registered to accommodate
employees, it may take 8-12 weeks for the university's application to be reviewed and approved.
if a hiring manager posts a position without approval for an out-of-state employee, but later wishes to hire an
out-of-state applicant, the hiring manager must seek approval in accordance with the steps laid out above.
c
urrent in-state employees that wish to move out of state:
1. employee must submit a request to their manager as soon as possible, but no later than ninety
(90) calendar days prior to the anticipated start date of out-of-state employment.
2. if the position is already fully remote, the manager may skip to step 5.
3. if the position is not already fully remote, the manager must seek approval from the relevant
division head to allow the position to be performed remotely.

hrm-4004 – policy for employment of out of state residents
university of richmond | 5
4. the manager must then submit a request to human resources to permit full time remote work
for the position. the request must explain the reasons and business necessity for continuing to
employ an individual on a fully remote basis, residing outside of virginia.
a. this request will then be reviewed by the university controller, risk management, and
office of university counsel.
5. manager should refer to human resources' list of pre-approved states for remote work. if the
employee wishes to relocate to one of those states, the manager can approve the move.
6. if the employee is relocating to a state that is not on the pre-approved list, manager shall submit a
request to human resources, seeking permission to allow the employee to work in that state.
a. this request will then be reviewed by chief human resources officer, the university
controller, risk management, and office of university counsel.
7. if an employee is approved to work in a state that is not on the pre-approved list, the date that the
employee is permitted to work in that state will be delayed until the university completes all
necessary steps to be in compliance with that state's laws and regulations.
employees residing and working out-of-state at the time this policy is implemented should contact their
supervisor and human resources to ensure compliance.
employees residing out-of-state must certify that they are living and working in a state outside of virginia and
submit all appropriate state tax withholding forms to human resources. it is the responsibility of the
employee and the managing department to promptly notify human resources of any changes to an
employee's residence.
the procedures section of this policy may be amended with approval by the chief human resources officer,
university controller, risk management, and office of university counsel.