university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
space is a vital resource for the university of richmond. the purpose of this policy is to ensure that
space and university facilities resources are allocated in a consistent manner designed to optimize the
use of this resource and to advance the mission of the university.
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right
to elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
index:
prm-1002.1 ......definitions
prm-1002.2 ......policy
prm-1002.3 ......roles and responsibilities
prm-1002.4…...planning, approval and monitoring
appendix a……space taxonomy
appendix b……annual process for development of facilities project plan
appendix c……capital project advisory group
policy #: prm-1002
policy title: policy on space allocation and facilities
resources
effective: 04/15/2024 responsible office: campus operations
date
approved:
04/08/2024 approval: executive vice president & chief operating
officer
replaces
policy dated:
08/20/2012 responsible
university official:
senior associate vice president for campus
operations

prm-1002– policy on space allocation and facilities resources
university of richmond | 2
appendix d……executive capital committee
appendix e……charge and composition of the classroom committee
policy statement:
prm-1002.1 – definitions
university space: all facilities, rooms, buildings, fields, and land owned or leased by the university,
including both indoor and outdoor locations, are considered university space
space taxonomy: university-wide classification system to categorize buildings and spaces within buildings
and assign responsibilities for building access, scheduling, and other critical space management functions.
assignable space: space that is frequently reassigned by a space steward through a specific process
conducted on a regular cycle (e.g., residence hall rooms, classrooms, athletics practice fields).
academic use spaces: university classrooms, auditoriums, studios and laboratories, whose primary purpose
is holding classes, conducting research, or accommodating other academic activities and are designated as
academic use spaces in the university space taxonomy.
priority use space: spaces primarily allocated to function-specific purposes (e.g., athletics facilities for
intercollegiate athletic purposes) and are designated as priority use spaces in the university space
taxonomy.
local use space: spaces, typically embedded within departments or units, that are utilized primarily by the
employees or students in that unit and are designated as local use spaces in the university space taxonomy.
also referred to as "locally managed" spaces.
general use space: all spaces at the university not categorized as academic, residential, priority use, or
local use and designated as general use spaces in the university space taxonomy.
conference rooms: small meeting spaces that are not classrooms and are within or immediately adjacent to,
and primarily used by, a specific office or department.
meeting spaces: meeting spaces that are not classrooms and are typically accessible without entering an
office suite or priority use area.
maintenance: a program of ongoing efforts and tasks undertaken to ensure a building and its systems
remain in a safe and functional operating condition. maintenance does not include beautification updates or
building modifications to address changes in use of a space.
prm-1002.2 – policy
all space on the campus is a university resource. decisions about university space and facilities
resources are made centrally and with a university-wide perspective to optimize the use of these resources
and advance the mission of the university. space allocation and modification decisions are made through

prm-1002– policy on space allocation and facilities resources
university of richmond | 3
the annual planning and budget processes.
in evaluating the use of space and facilities resources, the university prioritizes the safety of the campus
environment, the academic use of spaces, and students' lived experience on campus. projects are also
evaluated in light of the university's facilities condition assessments and schedule of maintenance, the ur
campus plan, and the availability of resources.
university space needs are evaluated based on quantitative and functional considerations and in the context of
the university's campus plan. for example, student enrollments, class size, and staffing levels are some of
the factors used in space need assessments. accordingly, space assignments will change to achieve optimal
utilization and to respond to current and emerging curricula, programs, unit needs, and technologies.
prm-1002.3 –roles and responsibilities
the senior associate vice president (savp) for campus operations is responsible for ensuring effective
space management and maintenance of university facilities. the savp for campus operations is
responsible for consulting with vice presidents, deans and space stewards regarding issues of space
allocation and quality, and for developing and implementing the multi-year facilities project plan as
outlined in this policy.
the university space manager is responsible for ensuring that systems and processes associated with
space management support university-wide space management decisions, effective implementation of the
facilities project plan, and policy compliance. the space manager serves as the data steward for
assignment of all university spaces and manages the inventory of all assignable office space. the space
manager also maintains the university's space taxonomy. (the role of university space manager is
assigned to the assistant director of campus planning)
university space stewards (as assigned in the university's space taxonomy) are responsible for planning
and space management processes for spaces within their domain, in collaboration with university
facilities. space stewards are responsible for the allocation of assignable space within their domain (e.g.,
residence hall rooms, classrooms) and for determining building access and hours for spaces within their
domain. space stewards also approve or disallow reservations for priority use space within their domain.
space stewards for specific areas are identified in the university space taxonomy (appendix a)
priority use contacts are responsible for determining building access and hours for spaces within their
domain and approving or disallowing reservations for priority use space within their domain.
vice presidents and school deans are responsible for identifying, prioritizing, and communicating the
space and facilities resources needs of their school or division through the university's planning
processes. they are also responsible for ensuring adherence to policies related to university space and that
the space that is allocated to their school or division is utilized effectively.
see appendix a for the university space taxonomy
prm-1002.4 – planning, approval and monitoring
multi-year facilities project plan development

prm-1002– policy on space allocation and facilities resources
university of richmond | 4
university facilities are maintained and renovated based on a multi-year facilities project plan to ensure
consistently high-quality facilities and resources. the facilities project plan is guided by the university
strategic plan, the university campus plan, the classroom master plan, and the regular facilities condition
assessments. vice presidents, deans and space stewards are expected to identify emerging facilities needs
in their area and prioritize their requests for facilities projects as part of the annual call for project requests. in
addition, vice presidents and deans must identify office and specialized research space needs as part of the
process to request new positions or permission to fill vacancies.
each year university facilities invites proposals from deans and vice presidents to identify and prioritize
facilities needs for their school or division, including requests for space reconfiguration, facilities projects, or
an update of building finishes. requests are typically due in march for projects to be completed 15 or more
months later. requests from vice presidents and deans are combined with needs identified by university
facilities and by the classroom committee. after preliminary consultation with the capital projects
advisory group and preliminary work to scope the proposed projects, the savp for campus operations
prepares a list of all potential projects and an initial update to the multi-year facilities project plan. that
proposed update is reviewed by the capital projects advisory group and, after any needed refinement, by the
executive capital project committee during the fall. in early winter each year, the emerging facilities
project plan is aligned with available resources as part of the budget development process and projects are
approved and scheduled, deferred, or declined. the university capital budget and associated projects are
reviewed by the planning and priorities committee as part of the budget development process before approval
is sought from the board of trustees. see appendix b for the process for developing the facilities project
plan
needs associated with new and replacement positions
office assignments:
requests for incremental (new) staff or faculty positions and replacement faculty positions will be made each
year in december as part of the budget process. as part of the request for a position, the vp or dean will
identify a proposed office assignment for the position – or indicate that no known office is available. the
university space manager will confirm the availability of the proposed office space or begin the process of
identifying available space.
when a vp or dean makes a request to fill a vacant position, the vp or dean must propose the office into
which the replacement hire will move (typically the office being vacated). the university space manager
will confirm the availability of the proposed office.
in the event that a new or replacement position is approved without a permanent office having been identified,
university facilities must confirm a temporary office before a search can begin. if any office upgrade is
requested, a project request should be submitted as soon as it is known. (see office assignment policy)
labs, studios and other specialized academic research space
as part of the request for a new or replacement hire for a faculty position that will require specialized research
space in addition to an office assignment, the dean will identify a proposed space for the lab or other research
space or indicate that no known space is available as part of the december budget submission. the university
space manager will confirm the availability of the proposed research space or begin the process of identifying

prm-1002– policy on space allocation and facilities resources
university of richmond | 5
available space. it is the responsibility of the dean to submit a project request to university facilities by the
march deadline for the laboratory or other research space that will be associated with the faculty search. at
that time, the dean will outline what is known about the extent of the renovation that will be necessary for the
new faculty member. when finalists are identified for the position, the school will update university
facilities on the possible scope of the project, depending on which faculty member is hired. once a candidate
is identified, the school will work with university facilities to develop a final scope, timeline, and accurate
estimates for the research space. any terms related to research space, furnishings or fixtures must be
approved by the savp for campus operations before they are offered to the candidate.
collaboration is likewise required when a faculty member or school plans to acquire a piece of equipment
that has specialized needs for electricity, hvac, air handling, or other infrastructure. the dean must
complete a facilities project request as soon as the project is known and collaboration with university
facilities on preparation of space and timeline necessary for any infrastructure upgrades must occur before the
equipment is acquired and prior to or immediately upon submission of a grant seeking support for the
purchase of such equipment.
off-cycle project requests
it is anticipated that matters may arise during the year outside of the annual budget and planning process. vice
presidents and deans are expected to initiate discussions on space with the savp for campus operations as
soon as the space need is identified, and project requests may be submitted at any time during the year. all
project requests submitted by the march deadline will be considered for inclusion in the next multi-year
facilities project plan. project requests submitted after the march deadline will typically not be considered
until the following year. off-cycle requests, to the extent that they must be addressed prior to the next review
period, will likely be addressed with temporary space solutions which may be shared or in a location that is
separate from the requesting unit. any adjustments to the facilities project plan that are necessitated by an
off-cycle request must be reviewed by the capital projects advisory group and approved by the executive
capital project committee.
maintenance requests
maintenance requests are submitted as work requests through the university facilities website and are
appropriate when a part of a building or building system is not functioning, is broken, or is unsafe.
maintenance requests should be made as soon as issues are identified and should not wait for the annual
facilities project plan request process. maintenance does not include space configuration or beautification
projects or enhancements to building finishes.
funding
funding for capital projects, renovations, and facilities maintenance projects included as part of the multi-year
facilities project plan are included in the annual budgeting process and typically paid for centrally.
in certain circumstances, a project requested by a school or division may be scheduled with the expectation
that the school, division, or dedicated philanthropy will fund or partially fund the project; however, the
availability or expectation of source of funding does not affect the prioritization of projects.
standard office upgrades (paint, flooring, carpet, furniture) for approved new staff and faculty hires will be

prm-1002– policy on space allocation and facilities resources
university of richmond | 6
made at the discretion of university facilities and funded by university facilities. such office upgrades will
ordinarily be completed only if they are on-cycle for the building, or part of the standard refresh for a new
faculty member. specialized furniture requests will generally not be accommodated unless necessary for the
for a disability accommodation or for a faculty member's teaching or research; in those instances where the
specialized requests are necessary, university facilities will typically fund the expense unless it is specifically
related to research.
the costs of preparing labs or other specialized research space for faculty will be shared by university
facilities and the hiring school as follows: specialized equipment, whether movable or affixed in a room,
and the direct costs of changes to infrastructure required to accommodate that equipment will be paid by the
school (e.g., specialized research computing equipment or servers, purchase of specialized ventilation hoods,
soundproofing, specialized lighting or audio, installation costs if outside vendor contract is required). general
infrastructure needs that are deemed necessary per university standards and performed by university
facilities will be covered as part of the university facilities budget (e.g., furniture, shelving, paint, flooring,
plumbing).
related policies:
office assignment policy
classroom scheduling policy
resignation and separation policy
university facilities access policy
lock and key management policy
events policy
policy background:
policy created july 16, 2012.
reviewed and updated in march 2024 to accommodate revised organization structure. reviewed and
approved by president's cabinet and deans prior to approval in april 2024.
non-substantive updates to appendix updated for committee membership changes on august 14, 2025
policy contacts:
senior associate vice president for campus operations
assistant director of campus planning

university of richmond | 7
appendix a space taxonomy
building category space steward
priority use
contact (if other
than steward) scheduling classification
academic buildings university registrar academic use
classrooms academic use
specialized academic spaces (labs, studios) academic use
public labs academic use
offices n/a
conference rooms local use
meeting / communal spaces academic use
modlin complex (theaters and recital halls) ed modlin priority use
boatright library
university
librarian academic use
law school law school dean academic use
law library
associate dean for
library &
information
services and
professor of law
academic use
residence halls
director, residence life
and housing local use only for communal spaces
student spaces
director student
involvement priority use
commons priority use
web priority use
cave priority use
multicultural space priority use

university of richmond | 8
building category space steward
priority use
contact (if other
than steward) scheduling classification
lodge priority use
westhampton kitchen priority use
athletics facilities and fields
deputy athletic director
& chief of operations priority use
hwb facilities and fields
director, university
recreation priority use
administrative buildings
savp for campus
operations varies
offices n/a
conference rooms local use only
meeting spaces / communal spaces general use
university priority use buildings
savp for campus
operations
queally center avp admission priority use
chapel u chaplain priority use
wilton center u chaplain general use
multifaith prayer room u chaplain n/a
maryland hall chief of staff local use only
jepson alumni center events priority use
dining spaces
executive director of
dining priority use

university of richmond | 9
appendix b annual process for development of the facilities project plan
potential capital projects, both identified by the campus comprehensive plan as well as through requests from
vice presidents and deans, will follow the below process timeline for review and approval.
march 31
all project requests due.
project requests may only be submitted by:
• a member of the president's cabinet
• an academic dean
• the classroom committee
requests may be submitted at any time prior to march 31 but will not be evaluated until after march 31;
all requests submitted will be considered for the fiscal year which starts 15 months later. requests
submitted after march 31 will be considered in the fiscal year 27 months later.
project requests will include any office needs and/or start-up needs associated with faculty or staff hiring
that has been approved.
april
design and construction begins initial fact-finding to determine the basic scope and understand any impacts or
relationships with other proposed, active, or future projects.
late april
the capital advisory group (cag) and space stewards meet to begin prioritizing and sorting project requests
to determine which requests proceed to the next step in the process.
summer
design and construction fine-tunes the scopes and develops initial rough budget estimates.
early september
the capital advisory group meets to finalize the proposed project list.
early october
the executive capital committee (ecc) meets to review the proposed project list and approve to move
forward with development of the final scope and budget. as needed to align with resources; some projects
tentatively approved in the fall may be moved to a future year.
october – early december
design and construction finalizes scopes and budgets. contractors are able to access spaces during fall break
to develop accurate scopes and pricing.
december
the cag meets to review the proposed project list after scopes, budgets, and schedules are finalized; some
approved projects may be rescheduled due to any of those constraints. the final list is delivered to the ecc with
final schedules and budgets.

university of richmond | 10
january / february
the ecc reconvenes to align project list with updated capital budget. as needed to align with resources; some
projects tentatively approved in fall may be moved to a future year.
february / march (aligned with further development of the budget)
response sent to campus partners. highest priority projects approved; some projects rejected. other projects
not scheduled may remain on the list for consideration in future review cycles.

university of richmond | 11
appendix c
capital project advisory group
charge and responsibilities
the capital advisory group (cag) assesses and prioritizes project requests from across campus that are
submitted by deans and vice presidents and makes recommendations for capital projects for the executive
capital committee's review and approval.
in considering the requests for projects, the cag will prioritize the safety of the campus environment, the
academic use of spaces, and students' lived experience on campus. the cag will also evaluate projects in light
of the university's facilities condition assessments and schedule of maintenance, the ur campus plan, and
the availability of resources. as representatives of critical functions across campus and space stewards,
members of the cag will bring vital subject matter expertise and must also bring a university-wide perspective
to the evaluation of project requests.
the cag will develop a list of projects annually in september with recommendations of projects that will
include initial budget projections and estimated timelines. projects which are not approved may be held for
review in future annual cycles. membership in the committee is by role.
membership
core team:
• savp for campus operations (chair)
• assistant director of campus planning
• associate vice president & dean of admission
• avp of development
• avp telecom, media & user services
• chief of staff, provost's office
• deputy athletic director & chief of operations
• director of sustainability
• director of university recreation
• director, campus ops budget & finance
• executive director of facilities operations
• executive director, campus business services
• executive director, dining services
• major, campus safety
• senior budget and planning analyst
• senior director of campus life
• university architect
• university registrar

university of richmond | 12
appendix d
executive capital committee
charge and responsibilities
the executive capital committee (ecc) reviews and sets direction for the execution of capital projects.
projects may be approved immediately, deferred to a specific future time, held on the list for review in a future
annual cycle, or declined.
the committee is chaired by the executive vice president / chief operating officer and consists of other
university executive positions. membership in the committee is by role.
the ecc meets two to three (2-3) times annually
membership:
• evp & chief operating officer (chair)
• assistant director of campus planning (staff to committee)
• evp for academic affairs & provost
• president's chief of staff
• vp for planning & policy
• avp, financial planning & budget
• savp for campus operations
• university architect

university of richmond | 13
appendix e
charge and composition of the classroom committee
charge:
the classroom committee provides oversight and stewardship of on-campus shared teaching spaces. it oversees
a systematic approach to evaluation, planning and coordinating classroom spaces throughout campus to provide
faculty and students with the best possible learning spaces to support the mission of the university, making
decisions regarding classroom renovations based on curricular needs, student impact, available budget, and
available facilities and is capacity. the committee works to
• serve as good stewards of existing instructional space
• respond to emerging instructional trends and needs of faculty
• gather and prioritize request for improvements to on-campus shared teaching spaces
• create flexible environments to accommodate different pedagogical methods
• monitor and report classroom usage.
• support the renovation and updating of classrooms.
• work with deans and faculty to determine present and future classroom needs to support learning
activities and a changing instructional environment.
membership:
• university registrar, co-chair
• assistant vice president, telecom, media, and user services, co-chair
• associate registrar, scheduling
• university architect
• savp for campus operations
• director, faculty hub
• senior interior designer
• assistant director, construction management and design
• provost (or designee)
• dean, arts and sciences (or designee)
• faculty technology committee representative
• one additional faculty member (not a&s)