university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
the purpose of this policy is to provide clarity about the distinction between funds to support business
expenses and funds paid as compensation.
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right
to elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
index:
fin-4102.1 ........definitions
fin-4102.2 ........policy statement
fin-4102.3……required approvals
policy statement:
fin-4102.1 – definitions
additional compensation:
additional compensation is a payment of university-administered funds that is over and above an individual's
base salary and benefits, whether one-time or on-going.
policy #: fin-4102
policy title: policy on business expenses and compensation
effective: 01/01/2024
responsible office: controller's office
date
approved:
12/05/2023 approval: evp and chief operating officer
replaces
policy dated:
n/a responsible
university official:
university controller

fin-4102 – policy on business expenses and compensation
university of richmond | 2
appropriate
appropriate means an expense is suitable or fitting in the eyes of an objective third party and fulfills a valid
business purpose.
business purpose
the business purpose establishes that a particular good, service or activity is necessary to fulfill the mission
of the university and primarily benefits the university.
necessary
an expense is necessary when it is required to achieve a particular business purpose.
reasonable expense
a reasonable expense is ordinary – not lavish or excessive – and reflects a prudent decision to incur
the expense on behalf of university in furtherance of its mission.
fin-4102.2 – policy
in accordance with federal requirements, if an individual has the right to receive compensation for services
performed, the university must report the income to the individual and the internal revenue service (irs).
in all cases, the university will determine whether financial consideration provided in association with a
particular program or activity is considered wages (compensation) or more appropriately classified as
professional development funds to be used for necessary and appropriate business expenses. such
determinations are made based on the program and services involved.
when faculty or staff perform services that would otherwise be paid to an individual to complete, but are
considered outside their regular work responsibilities, any financial consideration associated with these
additional activities or services are considered additional compensation and are taxable wages to the
employee. faculty may not receive professional development funds (sometimes called "faculty development
funds") for work that would otherwise be paid as additional compensation or are provided to other employees
as compensation. examples of such additional, taxable compensation include payments for overload teaching
or payments to 9-month faculty for mentoring undergraduate research students in the summer.
when faculty or staff participate in activities or services as part of their normal work responsibilities,
additional resources associated with that activity may be provided to support necessary and appropriate
business expenses. such resources are university funds, and must be spent in accordance with all university
policies related to the appropriate use of university resources. even if such funds are allocated to a faculty-
designated account ("faculty development account"), such funds are not taxable to the employee and may not
be used to pay additional salary to the employee directing those funds. such professional development funds
("faculty development funds") typically expire at the end of the fiscal year, with the exception of start-up
funds and research incentive accounts. balances allocated to employees expire upon an employee's
separation from the university and shall not be paid out to an employee. examples of non-taxable funds of
this type include start-up funds and funds provided to pay for the direct expenses associated with faculty
research or creative work or business-related travel.
fin-4102.3 – related regulations and accreditation standards
26 cfr § 1.451-2 constructive receipt of income

fin-4102 – policy on business expenses and compensation
university of richmond | 3
related policies:
fin-4101 – use of university funds and financial resources
acd-7401 – additional compensation for faculty
fin-1100 – policy on gifts, prizes and awards
policy background:
approved on december 5, 2023 and effective january 1, 2024
policy contacts:
university controller