university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
this policy is designed to foster adherence to the university of richmond's commitment to non-discrimination
and to ensure compliance with applicable laws. this policy serves as the university's notice of non-
discrimination for purposes of compliance with title vi and title ix (defined below) and fulfills the
university's obligations under irs revenue procedure 75-50 (as amended by revenue procedure 2019-22).
this policy and related university policies and procedures are not contracts and do not confer contractual rights
upon any individual. the university has the right to amend or modify this policy and related university policies
and procedures from time to time, without prior notice.
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right
to elect the majority of the entity's governing board. this policy applies to university students, staff, and
faculty and to other individuals participating in or attempting to participate in the university's education
programs or activities.
index:
gov-3101.1……policy
gov-3101.2……compliance with applicable law
gov-3101.3……reporting potential discrimination and harassment
gov-3101.4……grievance and complaint process
policy #: gov-3101 policy title: policy prohibiting discrimination
effective: 7/01/2025 responsible
office:
compliance, title ix and non-discrimination
date
approved:
06/17/2025 approval: vice president and general counsel
replaces
policy dated:
12/16/2024 responsible
university
official:
director of compliance & title ix coordinator

gov-3101 – policy prohibiting discrimination
university of richmond | 2
gov-3101.5……publication of notice of nondiscrimination
gov-3101.6……questions and additional information
policy statement:
gov 3101.1 – policy
the university of richmond prohibits discrimination and harassment against applicants, students, faculty or
staff on the basis of race, color, religion, national or ethnic origin, ethnicity, age, sex, gender, sexual
orientation, gender identity, gender expression, disability, military or veteran status, or any classification
protected by local, state or federal law. 1
as used in this policy and related university policies, the prohibition on discrimination based on national or
ethnic origin or ethnicity extends to discrimination, including harassment, based on an individual's actual or
perceived: (i) shared ancestry or ethnic characteristics, such as students of jewish, muslim, palestinian, and/or
south asian descent; or (ii) citizenship or residency in a country with a dominant religion or distinct religious
identity.
this policy applies to discrimination and harassment alleged to occur in any education program or activity of
the university, which means all of the operations of the university. this prohibition includes discrimination
in violation of this policy in the admission2 or retention of students. this policy also requires the university
to foster and maintain equality of opportunity for students, faculty, and staff without discrimination or
segregation on a basis prohibited by this policy.
the university is committed to preventing and responding to conduct that violates its non-discrimination
policy. any individual whose conduct violates this policy will be subject to disciplinary action in accordance
with applicable university policies and procedures.
gov 3101.2 – compliance with applicable law
the university complies with all applicable state and federal laws that prohibit discrimination and
harassment, including those described below.
a. title ix of the education amendments of 1972 (title ix)
the university does not discriminate on the basis of sex and prohibits such discrimination in any education
program or activity operated by the university in accordance with title ix and its implementing regulations.
this prohibition includes discrimination on the basis of sex in admission to university graduate programs and
employment. for purposes of this policy, this prohibition on discrimination includes, but is not limited to
discrimination on the basis of marital status, pregnancy, and childbirth or related conditions (including
lactation).
1 the statement set forth in this paragraph may not be altered or amended without the approval of the university of richmond
board of trustees.
2 undergraduate admission policies and practices that are permissible under title ix are not precluded by this policy.

gov-3101 – policy prohibiting discrimination
university of richmond | 3
b. title vi of the civil rights act of 1964 (title vi)
the university does not discriminate on the basis of race, color or national origin and prohibits such
discrimination in any education program or activity operated by the university. prohibited discrimination
includes denying the benefits or excluding from participation in any education program or activity operated
by the university on the basis of race, color, or national origin. the scope of the university's obligations
under title vi extends to prohibiting discrimination, including harassment, based on a student's actual or
perceived: (i) shared ancestry or ethnic characteristics; or (ii) citizenship or residency in a country with a
dominant religion or distinct religious identity. this prohibition includes discrimination on the basis of race,
color or national origin in admission to university programs.
c. other applicable laws
the university of richmond also complies with other applicable state and federal laws prohibiting
discrimination, including, but not limited to the age discrimination in employment act, section 504 of the
rehabilitation act, the americans with disabilities act, title vii of the civil rights act of 1964, the equal
pay act, and the virginia human rights act.
gov-3101.3 – reporting potential discrimination and harassment
the university strongly encourages prompt reporting of incidents that may constitute discrimination or
harassment. any member of the university community who believes that they may have been, or know
someone who may have been, discriminated against or subjected to harassment, including sexual harassment,
in violation of the university's policy, should report that concern or those concerns.
the university prohibits retaliation or retribution, in any form, against an individual who reports, in good
faith, an actual, potential or suspected violation of this policy. see the related policies listed below.
anyone who believes that they or someone they know has experienced discrimination or harassment in
violation of this policy against discrimination or related university policies should report that concerns as
follows:
• for cases involving students, either as the subject of the alleged discrimination or as the person
alleged to be discriminating, contact:
tracy cassalia, deputy title ix and non-discrimination coordinator, at (804) 289-8464,
tcassali@richmond.edu
.
• for disability related concerns, contact:
cort schneider, director of disability services at (804) 662-3017, cschnei2@richmond.edu.
• for matters involving faculty or staff either as the subject of possible discrimination, or as the
person alleged to be discriminating contact:
geraldine sullivan, chief human resources officer and deputy title ix coordinator for
employees at (804) 289-8166, geraldine.sullivan@richmond.edu.

gov-3101 – policy prohibiting discrimination
university of richmond | 4
• reports may also be directed to:
kristine henderson, director of compliance and title ix coordinator at (804) 289-8186,
khender3@richmond.edu.
while the university encourages people to report concerns regarding alleged discrimination or harassment
directly to the individuals listed above, reports may also be made via the university's ethics and compliance
helpline. the ethics and compliance helpline can be reached at (804) 287-1800 or by submitting an online
report.
gov 3101.4 – grievance and complaint process
the university's policies and procedures for responding to reports of discrimination and harassment, referred
to as grievance procedures, are set forth in university policies intended to supplement and complement this
policy. those policies are identified below.
a. students
• reports of discrimination based on sex - see the university of richmond
policy on prohibiting
and responding to sex discrimination - students.
• reports of sexual harassment or sexual misconduct – see the university of richmond policy on
prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment/sexual misconduct - students.
• reports of discrimination or harassment based on race, color, national origin, disability or
other protected status – see the university of richmond
policy on prohibiting and responding to
discrimination based on protected status - students.
b. staff and faculty
• reports of discrimination based on sex - see the university of richmond policy on prohibiting
and responding to sex discrimination - faculty and staff.
• reports of sexual misconduct or sexual harassment – see the university of richmond policy on
prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment/sexual misconduct – faculty and staff.
• reports of discrimination or harassment based on race, color, national origin, disability or
other protected status – see the university of richmond policy on prohibiting and responding to
discrimination based on protected status – faculty and staff.
• reports of discrimination based on parental, family, or marital status or pregnancy or related
conditions – see the university of richmond policy on pregnancy, childbirth, lactation and
related conditions – faculty and staff
gov 3101.5 – publication of notice of nondiscrimination
this policy serves as the university of richmond's notice of nondiscrimination under title ix and its
implementing regulations and is intended to provide information to university students and prospective
students regarding the scope of the university's obligations under title vi, consistent with 34 cfr §100.6(d).

gov-3101 – policy prohibiting discrimination
university of richmond | 5
the university will maintain a current copy of this policy/notice of nondiscrimination in the university's
policy library, which is available on the university's website at: policy library - university policies -
university of richmond. links to this policy will also be available on the university's compliance webpage
at compliance - university of richmond.
due to the size of this policy and the format and size of university handbooks, catalogs, announcements,
bulletins, and applications, the entire text of this policy/notice of nondiscrimination will not be included is
such documents. instead, each university catalog or primary brochure dealing with student admissions,
programs and scholarships shall include the following statement:
the university of richmond prohibits discrimination and harassment against applicants,
students, faculty or staff on the basis of race, religion, national or ethnic origin, ethnicity,
age, sex, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, disability, military or
veteran status or any classification protected by local, state or federal law.
the university's admissions website(s) will include a reference or link to this policy or the
foregoing statement.
gov 3101.6 – questions and additional information
for questions about this policy, including the application of title ix and its implementing regulations, please
contact the university's director of compliance and title ix coordinator, kristine henderson fountain hall,
suite 101, (804) 289-8186, khender3@richmond.edu. further information about the application of title ix
and its implementing regulations is available from the assistant secretary for civil rights, u.s. department
of education, office of civil rights, 400 maryland avenue, sw, washington, dc, 20202-1100; 800-421-
3481;
ocr@ed.gov; or http://www.ed.gov/ocr.
related policies:
gov-1004 policy prohibiting retaliation
gov-3108 policy on prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination – students
gov-3107 policy on prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination – faculty and staff
gov-3103 policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment/sexual misconduct - students
gov-3104 policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment/sexual misconduct - faculty and
staff
gov-3106 policy prohibiting and responding to discrimination based on protected status- faculty and staff
gov-3102 policy prohibiting and responding to discrimination based on protected status - students
hrm-5008 policy on pregnancy, childbirth, lactation and related conditions - faculty and staff
policy background:
this policy was updated in december 2024 to reflect an amendment to the university's non-discrimination
statement approved by the university of richmond board of trustees on december 6, 2024.

gov-3101 – policy prohibiting discrimination
university of richmond | 6
this policy was updated in august 2024 to identify the grievance processes for discrimination and
harassment, set forth in the related policies listed above. it was also updated to include specific requirements
for publishing notice of the university's statement of non-discrimination. at the time this policy update was
finalized, there were two federal court injunctions temporarily enjoining the implementation and enforcement
of title ix regulations issued by the department of education in april 2024, which included additional
requirements for publishing the notice of non-discrimination.
the august 2020 version this policy included revisions to be in compliance with the final rule for non-
discrimination on the basis of sex in education programs or activities receiving federal financial
assistance (title ix) issued from the department of education on may 19, 2020.
the procedures and contacts listed in this policy are regularly updated and are not subject to review and
approval by the board of trustees. such updates to procedures and contact information are not reflected in
the revisions history; revisions refer strictly to the policy.
policy contacts:
director of compliance and title ix coordinator