university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
all members of the university community and third-party users of university facilities are responsible for
knowing and acting in accordance with applicable laws and university policies concerning alcohol when
hosting an event on campus. the purpose of this policy is to inform the university community and third-party
users of university facilities of the procedures and regulations they must comply with when hosting an event
with alcohol at the university.
scope:
these procedures apply to all members of the university community and third-party users of university
facilities that wish to host events with alcohol on university of richmond property.
all alcoholic beverages to be consumed at university approved events must be supplied by university
catering or in conjunction with a university approved caterer with an abc license. spider brews and
approved events with beer trucks are the only exceptions. events with alcohol must be scheduled in an
approved wet space on campus unless prior approval has been granted by the executive director of dining
services.
virginia abc laws prohibit the use of donated alcohol.
index:
prm-4001.1 ......definitions
prm-4001.2 ......events with alcohol hosted by university departments/organizations or third-party users
of university facilities
policy #: prm-4001
policy title: policy for events with alcohol on campus
effective: 01/01/2021 responsible office: dining services
date
approved:
12/17/2020 approval: executive vice president & chief operating
officer
replaces
policy dated:
n/a responsible
university official:
executive director, campus dining

prm-4001 – policy for events with alcohol on campus
university of richmond | 2
prm-4001.3 ......acknowledgement of responsibility
prm-4001.4…..event coordination
prm-4001.5 ......id policy and process
prm-4001.6 ......beverage service procedures
prm-4001.7…..events with beer trucks
prm-4001.8…..student events with alcohol
policy statement:
prm-4001.1 – definitions
event manager – the person who takes full responsibility for management of the event including, but not
limited to, compliance with university, state and federal policies. serves as the first point of contact in the
event of an emergency or crisis. must be on site during the duration of the event.
student centered events – any event where the majority of participants are university students.
third party user of university facilities – groups not affiliated with the university of richmond that are
hosting an event on campus and have signed a contract to utilize the space and have food/beverages/alcohol
provided by university catering or an approved university caterer with an abc license.
university function – any activity that is conducted or sponsored by a university office, department, or by
university personnel, and is done on behalf of the university, whether the activity is conducted on or off
campus.
university owned property – any building or property owned or controlled by the university, other than
property leased by the university to others, within the same reasonably contiguous geographic area of the
university and used by the university in direct support of, or in a manner related to, it's educational purposes.
prm-4001.2 – events with alcohol hosted by university departments/organizations or third-party users
of university facilities
all events with alcohol must be registered and approved by the director of events, conferences and support
services and use university catering or a university approved caterer with an abc license for their alcohol
service.
prm-4001.3 –acknowledgement of responsibility
prior to registering any event on campus where alcoholic beverages are to be served, a responsible member of
the hosting organization/department must be knowledgeable about the university of richmond alcohol,
tobacco and other drug policy and virginia abc laws, and is therefore held responsible for compliance with
the above-named policies. approved campus guests/groups are also responsible for compliance with
university of richmond alcohol, tobacco and other drug policy and virginia abc laws and regulations.
1. event responsibility and supervision: all groups hosting an event with alcohol on campus must
designate an event manager to supervise the sponsored event. the event manager shall take reasonable

prm-4001 – policy for events with alcohol on campus
university of richmond | 3
steps to enforce and comply with local, state, and federal laws and university regulations governing
the use of alcohol. the event manager must be present for the entire event.
a. the host may be required to use a third-party vendor as an approved method of legal age
verification for all guests at the request of dining services or events, conferences and support
services. all alcohol events of 100 guests or more may be required to utilize wrist bands to
provide a method to comply with virginia abc guidelines as noted above.
b.the host and/or the attendees may be held responsible financially for damages or other problems
created by their guests as outlined in the temporary occupancy agreement.
2. types of events with alcohol:
a. a private event is an event where alcohol is served that is not open to the general public.
b.a public event is open to university community as well as the public
c. an organizational/departmental event is open only to members of the ur community and their
personally invited guests.
3. approved locations for events with alcohol: the consumption of alcoholic beverages at registered
events on campus is limited to approved locations. all other areas of the campus are considered public
areas where use of alcohol is prohibited. as the executor of the university's abc license, the
executive director, dining services can grant one-time exceptions allowing for approval of a public
area to host an event with alcohol. it is the responsibility of the campus department or organization to
secure this permission prior to planning their event.
4. access control: the event manager is responsible for monitoring the entrance to and exit from the
event. police personnel may be required at the direction of the chief of police or other university
administrator.
5. serving times: the maximum serving time for any alcoholic beverage is five hours during scheduled
serving times for the given date. service of alcoholic beverages must end 30 minutes prior to the
scheduled conclusion of the event, unless the service of alcohol is two hours or less (i.e., receptions).
for events more than two hours in length, where a meal is not served, alcohol service must end 30
minutes prior to the scheduled conclusion of the event. food is required at all alcohol events as noted
in number 9 below.
6. alcoholic beverages permitted: at departmental/organizational events where individuals are in
attendance who are under the legal age for possession and consumption, the only alcoholic beverages
that may be present or served to individuals of legal drinking age are beer and wine.
7. alcoholic beverages not permitted: the possession or use of common containers of alcohol
including, but not limited to, kegs, ¼ kegs and party balls are prohibited on university property.
8. non-alcoholic beverages at events: to ensure that one or more types of non-alcoholic beverages
(other than water) are provided in sufficient quantity for the duration of the event if alcoholic
beverages are to be present. non-alcoholic beverages must be as visible and accessible as the alcoholic
beverages which are being served
9. food at events: if alcoholic beverages are to be present, food is required in sufficient quantity for the
duration of the event. food items should be substantial (i.e., pizza, cheese, meats, bagels, etc.) and not

prm-4001 – policy for events with alcohol on campus
university of richmond | 4
just heavily salted items such as chips, nuts and pretzels. food items are to be as visible and accessible
as are the alcoholic beverages being served. for events catered by a university approved vendor, a
copy of the menu for the event must be submitted to the director of events, conferences and support
services for approval.
prm-4001.4 – event coordination
1. police: to maintain order for each event, an assessment of the security needs will be undertaken. this
process is coordinated by events, conferences and support services. the university police will decide
the number of personnel, and the sponsoring organization/department or third-party user will be
responsible for payment of services.
2. excessive attendance: public safety will take priority over all other considerations in the decision to
stop or limit admission to an event. the final responsibility for this decision rests with the university
police officer on duty at the event. if the event is determined to be out of control, the university police,
in consultation with the event manager and/or appropriate university personnel, will take direct action
concerning the termination of further consumption of alcoholic beverages, or the termination of the
event itself.
3. termination: any university police officer has the authority to order the event terminated for the
remainder of the time designated for that event if in their judgment, violations of the laws of the
commonwealth of virginia or the university of richmond alcohol, tobacco or other drug policy are
occurring. in addition, university catering and/or the university approved caterer is responsible for
maintaining compliance with all abc laws and regulations. failure of the host group and/or their guests
to adhere to these requirements may result in the termination of all alcohol service.
4. clean-up: university facilities or university dining services will charge the sponsoring organization
for clean-up if the facilities or surrounding areas are left in a state of disorder. the university will make
decisions about what constitutes a state of disorder.
prm-4001.5 – id policy and process
ids must be checked at all events where alcohol is served.
it is the responsibility of the abc license holder to check for a valid personal identification that verifies the
age of the individuals prior to their possession or consumption of alcohol. if the abc license holder is
unable to check ids, a third-party vendor must be hired to provide age verification. wristbands may be
required for some events, but would not be required for private events such as weddings.
at student centered events, it is the responsibility of the abc license holder to check for a valid personal
identification that verifies the age of the individuals entering an event. if the abc license holder is unable to
check ids, a third-party vendor must be hired to provide age verification. ur students must present their
valid driver's license, and in addition, a university id card may be required. all students 21 years of age or
older must be identified by a wristband that indicates the number of drinks allocated for the event.
prm-4001.6 – beverage service procedures
self-service of alcoholic beverages is prohibited. there must be a minimum of one beverage server
throughout the event responsible for the dispensing of alcoholic beverages. unlimited service of alcoholic
beverages is prohibited. university catering or the university-approved caterer will determine the number
of beverage servers needed for each event.

prm-4001 – policy for events with alcohol on campus
university of richmond | 5
beverage servers
dispensing of alcoholic beverages by the beverage servers will be according to the following procedures:
1. alcohol may not be dispensed to any individual who does not present proper government issued
age identification for possession and consumption of alcohol.
2. individuals may not be served more than one alcoholic beverage at a time at the cellar or at
student centered events. at catered events, individuals may not be served more than two drinks at a
time.
3. large containers (e.g., pitchers, buckets, jugs, etc.) will not be allowed or filled.
4. beer served from a common source (i.e. taps, beer trucks) must be dispensed in no greater than 14
oz. increments. cups used in serving beer must not exceed a total volume of 16 oz.
beverage managers
1. the university requires that trained (e.g., tips) beverage or bar managers be hired for events. in-
house training may be used as long as it covers the following: standard drink size; spotting
underage drinking; recognizing signs of impairment; how to intervene to avoid alcohol related
problems; and how to handle refusal to serve an individual alcohol. beverage managers will be
responsible for the supervision of individuals serving beverages. they also will be responsible for
seeing that beverage servers are in compliance with all laws and university policies.
2. the beverage manager as well as university police or members of the university administration
have the right to remove beverage servers from their duties, or remove from the event individuals
who are violating alcohol regulations or procedures.
beverage distribution
1. dispensing of alcoholic beverages must be restricted to the boundaries of the facility or approved
location. example: alice haynes room proper but not the hallway.
2. the university prohibits the distribution of unlimited quantities of free alcoholic beverages at
events that last more than 2 hours.
3. if alcoholic beverages are to be sold, the organization/department/approved third-party guest will
control its distribution by selling tickets to be used in exchange for alcoholic beverages.
appropriate food and beverage taxes must be paid. alcoholic beverages will be sold on a cost per
beverage basis. no credit or "tabs" may be run. consumption bars can only be run for catered
events.
4. if organizations/departments/approved third-party vendors are to have individuals of non-legal age
present at an event, university and abc regulations require the organization/department/third-
party vendor to adhere to the following procedures:
a. an area within the approved facility must be designated as an alcoholic beverage service
and consumption area. this area must have some type of physical barrier at which all
access and egress is controlled. this may include a partition, a roped area, a separate room,
etc. only individuals of legal age may enter this area.

prm-4001 – policy for events with alcohol on campus
university of richmond | 6
b. alcoholic beverages may be consumed by individuals in the controlled area only. no
alcoholic beverages may leave this area. appropriate signage should be in place.
prm-4001.7 – events with beer trucks
events with beer trucks must comply with all the procedures listed above. in addition, the event manager
must obtain an abc license for the event. the abc license must be obtained by a university staff or
faculty member. students cannot obtain the abc license. when applying for the license, the university
employee should state their name and that the license is on behalf of the university. for example, jane
doe on behalf of the university of richmond.
the abc license must be requested and paid for on-line: https://www.abc.virginia.gov/licenses/get-a-
license. university purchase cards do not typically allow the purchase of an abc license. please contact
accounts payable for permission to charge the abc license to your p-card.
prm-4001.8 – student events
student organizations that host events with alcohol must comply with the above procedures and in
addition, comply with the following:
1. scheduling for events: student sponsored events where alcohol will be present, served, or consumed,
normally will not be scheduled from 2:00 a.m. sunday through 4:00 p.m. on friday. events will not be
scheduled the day immediately prior to, or on reading days or exam days without special permission.
events with alcohol that are held on friday and saturday evenings must be concluded by 2:00 a.m.
requests for an event by groups wishing to use the cellar will be reviewed on an individual basis.
3. access control: the event manager is responsible for monitoring the entrance to and exit from the
event. police personnel may be required at the direction of the vice president for student
development, the chief of police, university administrator or their representative.
4. "bring your own beer" (byob) events are not permitted.
5. the possession or use of common containers including, but not limited to, kegs, ¼ kegs and party balls
are prohibited on campus.
6. swipe access: student organizations that host events with alcohol will be required to swipe all guests
into the event to create a guest list.
the following student events must comply with the event registration processes established by the
appropriate campus department:
student events in residential spaces: students who wish to host an event with alcohol in their
residence hall or apartment should do so in accordance with the event registration process established by
residence life & undergraduate student housing. students interested in registering an event in their
residence, should review the following: https://residencelife.richmond.edu/residence-
life/community/event-registration.html.
greek life events: greek organizations holding events with alcohol must register events ten days in
advance with the center for student involvement. for more information on greek life event and risk
management policies, please visit: https://involved.richmond.edu/greek-life/resources/policies-
procedures.html.

prm-4001 – policy for events with alcohol on campus
university of richmond | 7
related policies:
stu-1002 alcohol, tobacco and other drug policy
policy background:
this policy was reviewed by president's cabinet prior to approval on 12/14/2020.
policy contacts:
executive director, campus operations
director of events, conferences and support services