university of richmond |page 1
university of richmond
policy manual
policy #: gov-3107 policy title: policy on prohibiting and responding to sex
discrimination - faculty and staff
effective:
07/01/2025
responsible office:
compliance, title ix and non-discrimination
date
approved:
06/18/2025 approval: vice president and general counsel
chief human resources officer
replaces
policy dated:
12/16/2024 responsible
university official:
vice president and general counsel
director of compliance and title ix coordinator
purpose:
this policy is designed to foster compliance with title ix of the education amendments of 1972 (title
ix), title vii of the civil rights act of 1964 (title vii), other applicable laws, and the university of
richmond's prohibition against sex discrimination (as defined in this policy). this policy sets forth the
university's grievance procedures for the prompt and equitable resolution of complaints of sex
discrimination including the requirements for reporting information that may reasonably constitute sex
discrimination, and the university's process for responding to reports and complaints alleging sex
discrimination.
as a recipient of federal funds, the university of richmond complies with title ix. title ix provides: "no
person in the united states shall, on the basis of sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied benefits
of, or be subjected to discrimination under any education program or activity receiving federal financial
assistance."
this policy and related university policies and procedures are not contracts and do not confer contractual
rights upon any individual. the university has the right to amend or modify policy and related university
policies and procedures from time to time, without prior notice. additionally, this policy and related
university policies and procedures are not intended to replicate or supersede local, state, or federal
criminal or civil laws. university policies differ from the criminal and civil justice system and a finding of
responsibility for conduct prohibited by this policy shall not be construed as a finding that any criminal or
civil statute has been violated.

university of richmond |page 2
gov-3107 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination
- faculty and staff
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and its education program or activity (as defined herein).
this policy applies to university students, staff, and faculty and to other individuals participating in or
attempting to participate in the university's education programs or activity (as defined below). it also applies
to affiliates of the university.
this policy sets forth the process for handling complaints of sex discrimination, other than sexual harassment
and sexual misconduct. for information on the university's procedures for responding to sexual harassment and
sexual misconduct see the university's policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment/sexual
misconduct - faculty or staff.
academic freedom. this policy is not intended to and shall not be used to limit or restrict, in any manner,
academic freedom, including, but not limited to, the curricular or pedagogical choices of faculty members.
members of the university community are expected to promote academic freedom, including the freedom to
discuss all relevant matters in the classroom; to explore all avenues of scholarship, research, and creative
expression; and to speak or write as a public citizen without institutional restraint or discipline. members of the
university community are also expected to foster intellectual honesty and freedom of inquiry and to respect
those with differing views.
if a report or complaint relates to an academic issue, including, but not limited to, the selection of course
materials, the content of a course, the content of a class discussion, grade disputes, or course assignments and
projects, the dean of the appropriate school shall evaluate the report or complaint and conduct any follow-up
that may be warranted.
index:
gov-3107.1......policy
gov-3107.2......definitions
gov-3107.3......reporting concerns about sex discrimination
gov-3107.4......the role of the title ix coordinators
gov-3107.5......initial process for addressing notice or a complaint of sex discrimination
gov-3107.6 ….investigation, formal and alternative resolution process for complaints of sex
discrimination
policy statement:
gov-3107.1 – policy
the university of richmond prohibits discrimination against applicants, students, faculty, or staff on the
basis of race, color, religion, national or ethnic origin, ethnicity, age, sex, gender, sexual orientation, gender
identity, gender expression, disability, military or veteran status, or any classification protected by local, state,
or federal law.
1
1 the statement set forth in this paragraph may not be altered or amended without the approval of the university of richmond board of

university of richmond |page 3
gov-3107 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination
- faculty and staff
this prohibition includes all sex discrimination occurring in any education program or activity operated by
the university in the united states, in compliance with title ix and its implementing regulations, or in
connection with employment by the university, in compliance with title vii.
as described in this policy, the university shall make reasonable efforts to investigate and appropriately
address reports of sex discrimination. when the university has knowledge of conduct that reasonably may
constitute sex discrimination, the university will take prompt and effective steps reasonably calculated to
end such sex discrimination, eliminate any hostile environment or its effects, and prevent its recurrence.
for questions about this policy, including the application of title ix and its implementing regulations, please
contact the university's director of compliance and title ix coordinator, kristine henderson, fountain
hall, suite 101, (804) 289- 8186, khender3@richmond.edu. further information about the application of
title ix and its implementing regulations is available from the assistant secretary for civil rights, u.s.
department of education, office of civil rights, 400 maryland avenue, sw, washington, dc, 20202-1100;
800-421-3481; ocr@ed.gov; or http://www.ed.gov/ocr.
gov-3107.2 – definitions
complainant: a student, including an admitted student who has not yet enrolled, a faculty or staff
member, or any other individual who is alleged to have been subjected to conduct that could constitute
sex discrimination or retaliation and who was participating in or attempting to participate in the
university's education program or activity, including applicants for employment, at the time of the
alleged sex discrimination or retaliation.
complaint: a written request to the university that objectively can be understood as a request to
investigate and make a determination about alleged sex discrimination or retaliation under this policy
and title ix.
education program or activity: the phrase "education program or activity" means all of the
operations of the university. for purposes of this policy, conduct that occurs under the university's
education program or activity includes but is not limited to conduct that occurs in a building owned or
controlled by a recognized student organization and conduct that is subject to the university's standards
of student conduct. the university will address conduct that creates or may create a hostile
environment under its education program or activity even when some of the conduct alleged to be
contributing to the hostile environment occurs outside the university's education program or activity or
outside the united states.
hostile environment: a "hostile environment" means unwelcome conduct based on sex that, based on
the totality of the circumstances, is subjectively and objectively offensive and is so severe or pervasive
that it limits or denies a person's ability to participate in or benefit from the university's education
program or activity.
respondent: a person who is alleged to have engaged in conduct that could constitute sex
discrimination or retaliation.
retaliation: the term "retaliation" means intimidation, threats, coercion, or discrimination against any
individual by the university, a university student, faculty, or staff member, or anyone else authorized by
the university to provide aid, benefit, or service under the university's education program or activity, for
the purpose of interfering with any right or privilege secured by title ix or this policy.
trustees.

university of richmond |page 4
gov-3107 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination
- faculty and staff
sex discrimination: sex discrimination is discrimination in the university's education program or
activity in the united states based on an individual's sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity,
gender expression, sex stereotypes, sex characteristics, or pregnancy, childbirth, and related conditions.
supportive measures: supportive measures are individualized measures offered as appropriate and as
reasonably available to a complainant, respondent, or witness, without fee or charge, designed to: (1) restore
or preserve the individual's access to the university's education program or activity or to protect the safety of
the individuals or the campus community; or (2) provide support during an investigation, formal resolution
process or alternative resolution process under this policy.
title ix coordinator : the term "t itle ix coordinator" refers to the university's title ix coordinator, its
deputy title ix coordinators, and/or any designees appointed by the title ix coordinator or deputy title ix
coordinator(s).
gov-3107.3 – reporting concerns about sex discrimination
a. reporting sex discrimination. the university strongly encourages all students, faculty and staff
to promptly report potential sex discrimination.
b. how to report. information that may reasonably constitute sex discrimination should be reported as
follows:
• students: for matters involving students either as the subject of the alleged sex
discrimination or as the person alleged to be discriminating, contact tracy cassalia, deputy
title ix and non-discrimination coordinator, at (804) 289-8464, tcassali@richmond.edu.
for matters involving a student and a faculty or staff member as either the subject of or the
person engaging in alleged sex discrimination, contact tracy cassalia, as noted above, and
she will coordinate with the chief human resources officer and deputy title ix
coordinator for employees.
• faculty and staff: for matters involving faculty or staff as the subject of the alleged sex
discrimination or as the person alleged to be discriminating, contact geraldine sullivan chief
human resources officer and deputy title ix coordinator for employees and at (804) 289-
8166, geraldine.sullivane@richmond.edu
.
information may also be provided to:
kristine henderson, director of compliance and title ix coordinator at (804) 289-8186,
khender3@richmond.edu.
while the university encourages people to report concerns regarding alleged sex discrimination directly to
the individuals listed above, reports may also be made via the university's ethics and compliance helpline.
the ethics and compliance helpline can be reached at (804) 287-1800 or by submitting an online report
.
gov-3107.4 – the role of the title ix coordinators
the university's title ix coordinators are responsible for ensuring the university's compliance with title
ix. this policy sets forth the obligations of the appropriate title ix coordinator upon receipt of information
that may reasonably constitute sex discrimination or a complaint.
for more information on the role of title ix coordinators at the university, see the university's title ix
coordinators policy.

university of richmond |page 5
gov-3107 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination
- faculty and staff
gov-3107.5 – initial process for addressing notice or a complaint of sex discrimination
a. complaints of sex discrimination
1. who may make a complaint of sex discrimination. a complaint of sex discrimination may be made
by any of the following individuals:
• a complainant;
• a parent, legal guardian, or authorized legal representative with the legal right to act on behalf of a
complainant;
• a title ix coordinator, pursuant to subsection 3107.5(a)(2), below;
• any student, prospective student, staff or faculty member of the university; and
• any individual who is or is attempting to participate in the university's education program or
activity at the time of the alleged discrimination.
2. complaints initiated by the title ix coordinator. when the deputy title ix coordinator is notified of
conduct that reasonably may constitute sex discrimination within the scope of this policy, the deputy
title ix coordinator shall, except as set forth herein, determine whether to initiate a complaint of sex
discrimination. the deputy title ix coordinator shall make such a determination only if: (i) no
complaint has been initiated pursuant to this policy or (ii) some or all of the allegations in a complaint
have been withdrawn; and an alternative resolution process has either not been commenced or has
terminated.
if the title ix coordinator decides to initiate a complaint under this subsection, the title ix
coordinator will notify the complainant in advance and will use reasonable efforts to address
reasonable concerns about the complainant's safety or the safety of others, including by providing
supportive measures.
b. initial response
1. outreach to the complainant. upon receipt of a complaint or notice of conduct that reasonably may
constitute sex discrimination within the scope of this policy, the title ix coordinator, will contact
the complainant in writing and offer to meet with the complainant. when the title ix coordinator
meets with the complainant, they provide the following information:
• the complainant's rights under this policy and related university policies, including the policy
on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment/sexual misconduct - faculty and staff;
• the university's obligation to treat both the complainant and the respondent equitably;
• that the respondent is presumed to be not responsible for the alleged conduct until a
determination regarding responsibility is made at the end of the formal resolution process;
• the university's obligation to investigate promptly a complaint of sex discrimination under
this policy;
• the complainant's right to participate or decline to participate in any investigation;
• that the university prohibits retaliation as described in this policy;

university of richmond |page 6
gov-3107 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination
- faculty and staff
• the availability and type of supportive measures;
• the options for filing a complaint; and
• the options for formal and alternative resolution of the complaint under this policy.
2. outreach to the respondent. following receipt of a complaint, the title ix coordinator will contact
the respondent in writing and offer to meet with the respondent. when the title ix coordinator meets
with the respondent, they provide the following information:
• the respondent's rights under this policy and related university policies, including the policy
on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment/sexual misconduct - faculty and staff;
• the university's obligation to treat both the complainant and the respondent equitably;
• that the respondent is presumed to be not responsible for the alleged conduct until a
determination regarding responsibility is made at the end of the formal resolution process;
• the university's obligation to investigate promptly a complaint of sex discrimination under
this policy;
• the respondent's right to participate or decline to participate in any investigation;
• that the university prohibits retaliation as described in this policy;
• the availability and type of supportive measures; and
• the options for formal and alternative resolution of the complaint under this policy.
3. written notice of allegations, procedures and rights. upon initiation of a complaint, title ix
coordinator shall provide written notice to the complainant and respondent, if their identities are
known, that sets forth the information listed below. this written notice shall be provided with
sufficient time for the complainant and respondent to prepare for an interview. if additional
allegations of sex discrimination arise in the course of an investigation, that are not included in the
original complaint, or a consolidated complaint under this policy, the title ix coordinator or
designee shall update this notice. the content of the written notice shall include:
a. a description of the conduct alleged in the notice or complaint to constitute sex discrimination;
b. the identities of the complainant and respondent, to the extent known;
c. the date(s) and location(s) of the conduct alleged to constitute sex discrimination, to the extent
known;
d. other sufficient information known at the time that would allow the complainant and
respondent to respond to the allegations;
e. a copy of or link to this policy and all related university policies setting forth the process for
investigation and formal and alternative resolution of the allegations or complaint;
f. a statement that retaliation is prohibited under this policy and related university policies; and
g. a statement that the complainant and respondent are entitled to an equal opportunity to access
the relevant and not otherwise impermissible evidence as provided in this policy.
c. supportive measures. the title ix coordinator shall offer and coordinate supportive measures for

university of richmond |page 7
gov-3107 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination
- faculty and staff
complainants and, where appropriate, respondents and witnesses upon receipt of information about
conduct that may reasonably constitute sex discrimination.
1. types of supportive measures. the type of supportive measures offered and coordinated may vary
based upon the circumstances of a specific matter and the reasonable availability of the supportive
measures. supportive measures include, but are not limited to, those listed here.
2. purpose / no unreasonable burden. supportive measures shall be designed to: (i) protect the safety of
a complainant, respondent, witness, or the campus community; or (ii) provide support to a
complainant, respondent, or witness during an investigation, formal resolution process, or an
alternative resolution process. supportive measures are not used for punitive or disciplinary reasons.
supportive measures should not unreasonably burden either the complainant or the respondent.
3. modification, termination, or continuation of supportive measures.
a. the title ix coordinator may modify supportive measures during or after an investigation, formal
resolution process, or alternative resolution process, consistent with subsection 2, above.
b. the title ix coordinator may continue some or all supportive measures after conclusion of an
investigation, formal resolution process, or alternative resolution process as the title ix
coordinator deems reasonably appropriate.
4. confidentiality of supportive measures. the university will maintain the confidentiality of the
supportive measures provided to a complainant, or respondent or witnesses unless the disclosure is
necessary to implement the supportive measure(s), to restore or preserve the complainant's or
respondent's access to the university's education programs or activity, or one or more of the
exceptions to the confidentiality requirement set forth in this policy apply. the title ix coordinator
may consult with the office of disability services to ensure that any supportive measure offered is
implemented in a manner consistent with applicable disability laws and regulations.
a. exceptions to the confidentiality requirement. the university may disclose information about
supportive measures provided to a complainant or respondent in the following circumstances:
i. when the complainant or respondent, as applicable, or their legally authorized
representative has consented to such disclosure;
ii. when reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of this policy; or
iii. when such disclosure is required by federal law or regulation or by a federal grant or
funding agreement, consistent with title ix, is required by state or local law, or when
permitted under ferpa or its implementing regulations.
d. administrative leave.
1. administrative leave. the university may place an employee respondent on administrative leave
from employment responsibilities during the pendency of an investigation, formal resolution process,
or alternative resolutions process, consistent with other applicable university policies and handbooks.
e. consolidation of complaints. when the allegations of sex discrimination arise out of the same facts or
circumstances, the title ix coordinator may consolidate two or more complaints of sex discrimination:
(1) against the same respondent(s); (2) against multiple respondents; or (3) when the complaint and
respondent initiate complaints against each other.
f. dismissal of a complaint
1. basis for dismissal of a complaint. the title ix coordinator may dismiss a complaint at any time

university of richmond |page 8
gov-3107 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination
- faculty and staff
prior to a final determination under a formal resolution process or an agreement under an alternative
resolution process for any of the following reasons:
a. the title ix coordinator is unable to identify the respondent after taking reasonable steps to do so;
b. the respondent is not participating in the university's education programs or activity;
c. the respondent is not employed by the university;
d. the complainant voluntarily withdraws any or all of the allegations in the complaint, the title ix
coordinator does not initiate a complaint under this policy, and the title ix coordinator
determines that without the withdrawn allegations, the conduct described in the remaining
allegations, if any, would not constitute sex discrimination under this policy even if proven;
e. the title ix coordinator determines that the conduct alleged in the complaint, even if proven,
would not constitute sex discrimination under this policy, provided that the title ix coordinator
has made reasonable efforts to clarify the allegations with the complainant.
f. specific circumstances prevent the university from gathering evidence sufficient to reach a
determination as to the allegations in the complaint.
2. time frame for decision. the title ix coordinator shall make a decision as to whether to dismiss
the complaint within thirty (30) days of receipt of information indicating a potential basis for
dismissal as set forth in section 3107.5(f)(1) of this policy. this time frame may be extended on a
reasonable, case-by-case basis for good cause. the title ix coordinator will notify the complainant
and respondent, in writing, of the extension and the reason for the extension.
3. notice to complainant and respondent. the title ix coordinator shall promptly notify the
complainant, in writing, of the dismissal of a complaint and the basis for such dismissal. if the
dismissal occurs after the respondent has been notified of the complaint, the title ix coordinator
shall notify the respondent, in writing, of the dismissal of a complaint and the basis for such
dismissal at the same time that the complainant is notified. such notice shall include the rights of the
complainant and respondent to file an appeal of the dismissal and the basis for such appeal as set
forth in this policy.
4. supportive measures and steps to prevent discrimination and eliminate hostile environment if the
title ix coordinator dismisses a complaint, the title ix coordinator shall:
a. offer appropriate supportive measures to the complainant;
b. offer appropriate supportive measures to the respondent if the dismissal occurs after the
respondent has been notified of the complaint; and
c. take other prompt and effective steps reasonably calculated to end any sex discrimination,
eliminate any hostile environment or its effects, and prevent its recurrence.
5. appeal of decision to dismiss complaint. a complainant has a right to appeal the dismissal of a
complaint on the grounds set forth in this policy. if the dismissal occurs after the respondent has
been notified of the complaint, then the respondent also has a right to appeal the dismissal of the
complaint on the grounds set forth in this policy.
1. grounds for appeal. the grounds for an appeal are as follows:
i. a procedural irregularity that would change the outcome of the decision to dismiss the
complaint;

university of richmond |page 9
gov-3107 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination
- faculty and staff
ii. the appealing party has identified and proffered new evidence that was not reasonably
available at the time the complaint was initiated or the decision to dismiss was made that
would change the outcome of the decision to dismiss the complaint; or
iii. the title ix coordinator or the investigator had a conflict of interest or bias for or against
complainants or respondents generally or the individual complainant or respondent that
would change the outcome of the decision to dismiss the complaint.
2. process for appeal.
i. the complainant or the respondent may file an appeal with the director of compliance or
their designee (the "appellate officer") within five (5) business days of being notified of the
title ix coordinator's decision to dismiss the complaint.
ii. the appeal must be in writing and must be emailed to the appellate officer with a copy to
the title ix coordinator. the appeal must state the grounds for the appeal and may include
a statement in support of the party's appeal or a statement challenging the decision to
dismiss the complaint.
iii. the title ix coordinator will notify the parties, in writing, when an appeal is filed and, if
the respondent has not previously been notified of the complaint, the title ix coordinator
will notify the respondent of the allegations in the complaint.
iv. the appellate officer will respond promptly to such an appeal and shall render a decision in
writing within thirty (30) days of receipt of the appeal. this time frame may be extended on
a reasonable, case-by-case basis for good cause. the appellate officer will notify the
complainant and respondent, in writing, of the extension and the reason for the extension.
v. the appellate officer will provide the complainant and the respondent with a copy of the
decision at the same time.
gov-3107.6 –investigation, formal and alternative resolution process for complaints of sex
discrimination
a. overall requirements
1. prompt and equitable process. this policy is intended and shall be implemented in a manner that
provides a prompt and equitable resolution process for complaints of sex discrimination. this policy
shall be applied in a manner that treats complainants and respondents equitably.
2. conflicts of interest. the title ix coordinator, the investigator, and the decision-maker involved in the
university's investigation, formal resolution process, or alternative resolution process shall not have a
conflict of interest or a bias for or against complainants or respondents generally or the complainant or
respondent involved in the complaint under investigation or adjudication.
3. presumption. in implementing this policy and any investigation, formal resolution process or
alternative resolution process, there shall be a presumption that the respondent is not responsible for
the alleged sex discrimination until a determination is made at the end of a formal resolution process
or the respondent voluntarily acknowledges their responsibility as part of an alternative resolution
process.
4. privacy. the title ix coordinator, the investigator, the appellate officer and others involved in the
investigation, formal resolution process, and alternative resolution process will take reasonable steps to
protect the privacy of the complainant, the respondent and any witnesses during the process. the

university of richmond |page 10
gov-3107 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination
- faculty and staff
commitment to privacy, however, shall not be implemented in a manner that restricts the ability of the
complainant and respondent to obtain and present evidence, including by speaking to witnesses,
consulting with family members, confidential resources, or advisors, or otherwise preparing for an
investigation, formal resolution process, or alternative resolution process.
5. objective evaluation. the investigator and the decision-maker in a formal resolution process under
this policy shall objectively evaluate all evidence that is relevant and not impermissible (as defined
below), including both inculpatory and exculpatory evidence. the investigator or the decision-maker
may engage in credibility assessments but shall not make credibility determinations based on an
individual's status as a complainant, respondent, or witness.
a. relevant evidence, testimony and questions. evidence, testimony, and questions are considered to
be relevant when they are related to the allegations of sex discrimination set forth in a complaint
or otherwise under investigation or subject to adjudication in a formal resolution process.
questions are relevant when they seek evidence that may aid in showing whether the alleged sex-
discrimination occurred. evidence is relevant when it may aid a decision-maker in determining
whether the alleged sex discrimination occurred.
b. impermissible evidence, testimony, and questions. the investigator and the decision-maker in a
formal resolution process shall exclude and shall not consider evidence, testimony and questions
that are impermissible under this policy, regardless of whether they are relevant. the following
evidence, testimony and questions are impermissible:
i. evidence or testimony or questions that seek to elicit information that is protected under a
privilege as recognized by federal or state law, unless the person to whom the privilege is
owned has voluntarily waived that privilege;
ii. evidence or testimony or questions that seek to elicit information that was shared with a
confidential resource, unless the person to whom the privilege is owned has voluntarily waived
that confidentiality;
iii. evidence or testimony or questions that seek to elicit information regarding records made or
maintained by a physician, psychologist or other health care professional in connection with the
provision of treatment, unless the person to whom the privilege is owned has voluntarily waived
that confidentiality; or
iv. evidence or testimony or questions that seek to elicit information regarding the complainant's
sexual interests or prior sexual conduct, unless: (a) evidence of prior sexual conduct is offered to
provide that someone other than the respondent committed the alleged conduct; or (b) the
evidence, testimony or questions relate to specific incidents of the complainant's sexual
conduct with the respondent that is offered to provide consent to the alleged sex
discrimination. however, the fact of prior consensual sexual conduct between the complainant
and respondent does not, but itself, demonstrate or imply the complainant's consent to the
alleged conduct at issue or preclude a determination of responsibility.
b. investigation of complaints of sex discrimination
1. assignment of investigator. upon receipt of a complaint and provided that the complainant and
respondent have not agreed to an alternative resolution process, the title ix coordinator shall conduct
the investigation or will engage a qualified designee to conduct the investigation. the investigation
will be conducted in a prompt, objective, and thorough manner.
2. burden of gathering evidence. the university shall have the burden to conduct an investigation that

university of richmond |page 11
gov-3107 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination
- faculty and staff
gathers sufficient evidence to determine whether sex discrimination occurred. neither the
complainant nor the respondent have such a burden.
3. opportunity to present witnesses and evidence. the investigator shall provide the complainant and
the respondent with an equal opportunity to notify the investigator of fact witnesses and to provide
inculpatory and exculpatory information to the investigator that is relevant and not impermissible under
this policy. the investigator shall contact the fact witnesses identified by the complainant and
respondent and shall interview all relevant witnesses who agree to participate in the investigation.
4. written investigative report. the investigator shall review all evidence gathered during the
investigation and shall determine what evidence is relevant and what evidence is impermissible,
regardless of its relevance. the investigative report shall not include evidence that is either irrelevant
or impermissible. the written report shall include, as appendices, all relevant and permissible evidence
and transcripts of interviews with the complainant, respondent and witnesses, which may be redacted
to exclude statements that are irrelevant or impermissible under this policy.
5. access and response to the investigative report and evidence.
a. access to preliminary report. the title ix coordinator shall provide both the complainant and the
respondent with access to the preliminary investigative report and its appendices containing
relevant and permissible information. if the complaint is directed at a university program, policy,
or practice and not a specific respondent, the title ix coordinator shall provide the appropriate
university official(s) with access to the preliminary investigative report.
b. response to investigative report.
the complainant and respondent will have ten (10) days from
the date that access was provided to submit a written response to the investigative report and
evidence in the appendices which the investigator will consider prior to completion of the final
report. if the complaint is directed at a university program, policy, or practice and not a specific
respondent, the appropriate university official(s) will have ten (10) days from the date that access
was provided to submit a written response to the investigative report and evidence in the appendices
which the investigator will consider prior to completion of the final report. this time frame may be
extended by the title ix coordinator on a reasonable, case-by-case basis for good cause. the title
ix coordinator will notify the complainant and respondent, in writing, of the extension and the
reason for the extension.
c. access to final report. the title ix coordinator shall provide both the complainant and the
respondent with access to the final investigative report and its appendices containing relevant and
permissible information.
6. time frame for investigation. the time frame for the investigation will generally be 30 to 120 days,
depending upon the complexity of the investigation. this time frame may be extended on a reasonable,
case-by-case basis for good cause. the title ix coordinator will notify the complainant and
respondent, in writing, of the extension and the reason for the extension.
c. assessment and coordination of remedies by title ix coordinator
1. complaints against the university. if complaint is directed at a university program, policy, or
practice and not a specific respondent, and the complainant and appropriate university officials have
not elected to pursue alternative resolution of the complaint, as described in section 3107.6(d) of this
policy, the title ix coordinator shall take the actions described below.
a. determination by title ix coordinator.
i. after reviewing the final investigative report, the parties' responses to the preliminary

university of richmond |page 12
gov-3107 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination
- faculty and staff
investigative report and any supplemental investigative report the title ix coordinator shall
determine, based on a preponderance of the evidence standard of proof, whether the alleged sex
discrimination occurred.
ii. the title ix coordinator shall consider only evidence and testimony that is relevant and not
impermissible, consistent with this policy.
iii. the title ix coordinator shall make such a determination within 30-90 days of receipt of the
final or supplemental investigative report, if any.
b. notice of determination/remedies
i. the title ix coordinator will provide the complainant and the appropriate university
official(s) with written notice of the title ix coordinator's determination as to whether sex
discrimination occurred. that notice shall include the rationale for such decision and the right
of the complainant to file an appeal of the dismissal and the basis for such appeal as set forth in
this policy.
ii. the title ix coordinator shall notify the complainant and the appropriate university official(s),
in writing, of any remedies that will be implemented to restore or continue complainant's equal
access to the university's education program or activity or to remedy any hostile environment.
iii. the title ix coordinator shall coordinate with appropriate university officials to take
reasonably prompt and effective steps to ensure that sex discrimination does not recur in the
program, policy, or practice at issue in the complaint and that any hostile environment is
remedied.
c. appeals. the complainant and the appropriate university officials each have a right to appeal the
determination of the title ix coordinator on the grounds set forth in this policy.
i. grounds for appeal. the grounds for an appeal are as follows:
a. a procedural irregularity that would change the outcome of the decision regarding the
complaint;
b. the appealing party has identified and proffered new evidence that was not reasonably
available at the time the complaint was initiated or the decision was made that would
change the outcome of the decision; or
c. the title ix coordinator or the investigator had a conflict of interest or bias for or against
complainants or institutions generally or the individual complainant or university officials
that would change the outcome of the decision.
ii. process for appeal.
a. the complainant or the appropriate university official may file an appeal with the
executive vice president and chief operating officer in the case of a staff complainant or
the executive vice president and provost in the case of a faculty complainant, or their
designee, (the "appellate officer") within five (5) business days of being notified of the
title ix coordinator's decision.
b. the appeal must be in writing and must be emailed to the appellate officer. the appeal
must state the grounds for the appeal and may include a statement in support of the party's
appeal or a statement challenging the decision of the title ix coordinator.
c. the title ix coordinator will notify the parties, in writing, when an appeal is filed.

university of richmond |page 13
gov-3107 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination
- faculty and staff
d. the appellate officer will respond promptly to such an appeal and shall render a decision in
writing within thirty (30) days of receipt of the appeal. this time frame may be extended on
a reasonable, case-by-case basis for good cause. the appellate officer will notify the
complainant and the appropriate university officials, in writing, of the extension and the
reason for the extension.
e. the appellate officer will provide the complainant and the appropriate university officials
with a copy of the decision at the same time.
2. complaints against a respondent. if the complaint is based on the alleged conduct of a respondent,
and the complainant and respondent have not elected to pursue alternative resolution of the
complaint, as described in section 3107.6(d) of this policy, the title ix coordinator shall take the
actions described below.
a. review investigative report. the title ix coordinator shall review the final investigative report
and the parties' response to the preliminary investigative report.
b. interim action. after reviewing the final investigative report and the parties' response to the
preliminary investigative report, the title ix coordinator shall determine whether any interim
actions need to be taken prior to the conclusion of a formal resolution process to restore or continue
complainant's equal access to the university's education program or activity or to remedy a
hostile environment. such interim actions may include but are not limited to implementation
additional supportive measures or modification of existing supportive measures consistent with
section 3107.5(c) of this policy, or other interim actions, other than the imposition of sanctions
against the respondent, designed to restore or continue complainant's equal access to the
university's education program or activity. the fact that the title ix coordinator implemented
such interim action shall not be used as evidence in a formal resolution process.
d. alternative resolution
1. purpose of alternative resolution. alternative resolution is a voluntary process for resolving a
complaint of sex discrimination and is an alternative to the formal resolution process described in this
policy. both the complainant and the respondent must agree to participate in an alternative resolution
process. the alternative resolution process is designed to eliminate the reoccurrence of the prohibited
conduct and provide a remedy that meets the needs of both the complainant and respondent while
maintaining the safety of the campus community. alternative resolution provides an opportunity for the
complainant and respondent to discuss the complaint and the alleged discriminatory conduct and to
communicate their feelings and perceptions regarding the conduct, the impact of the conduct and their
wishes and expectations regarding their conduct in the future.
if a mutually agreeable resolution is reached through the alternative resolution process, the matter will
be closed and there will be no formal sanction imposed under the university's progressive discipline
policy or the faculty handbook, unless the respondent voluntarily agrees to accept a sanction.
2. role and discretion of the title ix coordinator. the title ix coordinator may offer the complainant
and the respondent the option of pursuing an alternative resolution process at any time prior to a final
determination as to whether sex discrimination occurred. the title ix coordinator is not required to
offer the option of alternative resolution and shall use their discretion to determine whether alternative
resolution is appropriate under the circumstances. in making this determination, the title ix
coordinator shall consider, among other factors, whether the alleged conduct would present a future
risk of harm to others.
3. options for alternative resolution. the title ix coordinator will discuss with the complainant and

university of richmond |page 14
gov-3107 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination
- faculty and staff
respondent the options for an alternative resolution, which may include, among other options, the
following:
a. a discussion between the complainant and respondent facilitated by a university administrator
approved by the title ix coordinator; or
b. mediation conducted by a neutral, third-party mediator.
the facilitator or mediator assigned to the matter shall not be the same person who conducted or would
conduct an investigation or the decision-maker in a formal resolution process.
4. notice of alternative resolution. if the complainant and respondent agree to participate in an
alternative resolution process, the title ix coordinator shall provide each party with a written notice
that contains the following:
a. the allegations at issue;
b. a description of the alternative resolution process and its requirements;
c. a statement that the complainant and respondent each have the right, at any time prior to agreeing
to a resolution, to withdraw from the alternative resolution process and initiate or continue a formal
resolution process;
d. a statement that the parties' agreement to a resolution at the conclusion of the alternative resolution
process precludes initiating or resuming a complaint or resolution process arising out of the same
allegations;
e. the potential terms that may be requested or offered in an alternative resolution agreement,
including notice that an alternative resolution agreement is binding only on the parties; and
f. that the university will maintain the confidentiality of information shared during the alternative
resolution process, to the extent permitted by law, and that such information shall not be used in a
subsequent formal resolution process.
5. alternative resolution agreement. at the conclusion of the alternative resolution process, the agreement of
the parties, if any, will be documented in a formal, written resolution agreement that must be approved
by the title ix coordinator and then signed by the complainant and respondent. the alternative
resolution agreement is binding only on the complainant and respondent.
6. termination of the alternative resolution process. the university, the complainant or the respondent
may, at any time prior to the conclusion of the alternative resolution process, elect to end such
proceedings and pursue formal resolution instead. in such cases, statements or disclosures made by the
parties in the course of the alternative resolution may not be considered in the subsequent formal
resolution process.
e. formal resolution process. if the parties have not agreed to an alternative resolution process, as
described in section 3107.6(d) if this policy, and if the complaint has not been dismissed by the title ix
coordinator pursuant to section 3107.5(f) of this policy, the complaint will be adjudicated through a
formal resolution process.
1. student as the respondent. if the respondent is a student at the university, the complaint will be
adjudicated under the process set forth in the university's standards of student conduct.
2. staff member as respondent. if the respondent is a staff member of the university, the complaint
will be adjudicated under the process set forth in appendix a of this policy.

university of richmond |page 15
gov-3107 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination
- faculty and staff
3. faculty member as respondent. if the respondent is a faculty member of the university, the
complaint will be adjudicated under the process set forth in the faculty handbook.
4. requirements for all adjudication processes. regardless of the status of the respondent, the formal
resolution process for all complaints of sex discrimination shall meet the requirements set forth in this
section 3107.6(e)(4) and to the extent that there is a conflict between the requirements of this section
and another university policy, handbook or the standards of student conduct, the terms of this section
shall govern.
a. standard of proof. the decision-maker shall use the preponderance of evidence standard of proof
to determine whether sex discrimination occurred.
b. relevant and not impermissible evidence. the decision-maker shall consider only evidence and
testimony that is relevant and not impermissible, as described in this policy.
c. notice of determination and right of appeal. the decision maker shall notify the complainant
and the respondent, in writing, of the determination as to whether sex discrimination occurred.
such notice shall include the rationale for such decision and the process and grounds for appeal, if
available.
d. imposition of sanctions. the university shall not impose disciplinary sanctions on a respondent
unless there is a determination following the conclusion of a formal resolution process that the
respondent engaged in sex discrimination prohibited by this policy, or the respondent
voluntarily agreed to such sanction as part of an alternative resolution process. additionally, the
university shall not impose any disciplinary sanction for making false statements solely on the
basis of the decision-maker's determination that sex discrimination occurred.
e. role of the title ix coordinator. if the decision-maker determines that sex discrimination
occurred, the title ix coordinator, as appropriate, shall:
1. coordinate the provision and implementation of remedies to the complainant and any other
person that the university identifies has having had equal access to the university's education
program or activity limited or denied by the respondent's conduct;
2. coordinate, in collaboration with other university officials, the imposition of sanctions against
the respondent; and
3. take other appropriate, prompt, and effective steps intended to ensure that sex discrimination
does not continue or occur within the university's education program or activity and that any
hostile environment is remedied.
f. retaliation
1. retaliation is prohibited. the university prohibits retaliation, in any form, against an individual who
reports, in good faith, an actual, potential or suspected violation of this policy. as used in this policy,
reporting "in good faith" means the individual making the report has a reasonable basis to believe that
there has been or may have been a violation of this policy. individuals who make frivolous or false
reports shall not be deemed to be acting in good faith.
the university also prohibits retaliation, in any form, against an individual who initiates a complaint,
participated in or refused to participate in an investigation, alternative or formal resolution process,
served as a witness in an investigation or hearing, or sought or initiated supportive measures under this
policy.
2. response to alleged retaliation. the university will respond to information about conduct that

university of richmond |page 16
gov-3107 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination
- faculty and staff
reasonably may constitute retaliation or to a complaint alleging retaliation in accordance with the
procedures and requirements set forth in this policy.
related policies:
gov-1004 policy prohibiting retaliation
gov-3101 policy prohibiting discrimination
gov-3103 policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment/sexual misconduct - students
gov-3104 policy on prohibiting and responding to sexual harassment/sexual misconduct - faculty
and staff
gov-3108 policy on prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination – students
hrm-5008 policy on pregnancy, childbirth, lactation, and related conditions – faculty and staff
standards of student conduct
faculty handbook
progressive discipline policy
staff grievance procedure
policy background:
this policy was updated in december 2024 to reflect an amendment to the university's non-discrimination
statement approved by the university of richmond board of trustees on december 6, 2024.
this policy was created in august 2024. its scope is limited to sex discrimination. the university's
procedures for responding to reports or complaints of sexual harassment/sexual misconduct are set forth
in new policies listed under "related policies," above. at the time this policy update was finalized,
there were two federal court injunctions temporarily enjoining the implementation and enforcement of
title ix regulations issued by the department of education in april 2024. the 2020 version of the title
ix regulations do not include provisions regarding sex discrimination. they are limited to sexual
harassment and sexual misconduct. this policy was reviewed to ensure continued compliance with
title ix, title vii and its implementing regulations, and the clery act and its implementing regulations.
it was also updated to include certain procedures set forth in the 2024 title ix regulations that were not
in conflict with the 2020 regulations.
p
olicy contacts:
director of compliance and title ix coordinator
chief human resources officer and deputy title ix coordinator for employees
deputy title ix and non-discrimination coordinator

university of richmond |page 17
gov-3107 –policy on prohibiting and responding to sex discrimination
- faculty and staff
appendix a
formal resolution process for staff respondents
1. investigation.
a. upon initiation of a complaint and if the parties have not agreed to alternative resolution, an
investigation will be conducted as set forth in section 3107.6 of this policy.
b. if the investigation is conducted by a designee or other investigator appointed by the title ix
coordinator, the final investigative report and any response to the preliminary investigative report
submitted by the complainant and/or respondent shall be reviewed by the title ix coordinator,
prior to making any determination of responsibility or sanctions.
2. determination of responsibility / sanctions
a. the title ix coordinator shall consider only evidence and testimony that is relevant and not
impermissible, consistent with this policy.
b. after reviewing the final investigative report and the parties' responses to the preliminary
investigative report, the title ix coordinator shall determine, based on a preponderance of the
evidence, whether the alleged sex discrimination occurred.
c. the title ix coordinator will provide the complainant and respondent with written notice of the
title ix coordinator's determination as to whether sex discrimination occurred. that notice shall
include:
i. the rationale for such decision; and
ii. the right to seek review of the decision and any sanctions imposed under the university's
staff grievance procedure
.
d. the title ix coordinator shall notify the respondent, in writing, of any disciplinary sanction to be
imposed against the respondent following a determination of responsibility for sex discrimination.
e. the title ix coordinator shall also notify the complainant, in writing, of any remedies that will be
implemented to restore or continue complainant's equal access to the university's education
program or activity.
3. time frame for determination. the time frame for making a determination of responsibility,
implementing remedies, and imposing a sanction will generally be 30 to 120 days, depending upon the
complexity of the investigation and the need to interview the complainant, respondent, or witnesses to
assess credibility. this time frame may be extended on a reasonable, case-by-case basis for good
cause. the deputy title ix coordinator will notify the complainant and respondent, in writing, of the
extension and the reason for the extension.