university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
the purpose of this policy is to ensure that all proposed changes to academic programs are thoroughly
reviewed by the faculty and academic leadership, and that the review and approval processes support
compliance with federal and sacscoc requirements. this document codifies the process and
documentation needed for approving new academic
programs, or modifying, suspending or eliminating
existing academic programs.
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right
to elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
index:
acd-1605.1 .......definitions
acd-1605.2 .......policy statement
acd-1605.3 .......approval process
acd-1605.4…...timeline
acd-1605.5……documentation
acd-1605.6……changes and modifications to this process
acd-1605.7……applicable regulations and accreditation standards
policy #: acd-1605
policy title: policy for creating, modifying, suspending or
eliminating academic programs
effective: 01/15/2023 responsible office: office of the provost
date
approved:
01/10/2023 approval: evp and provost
replaces
policy dated:
05/18/2021 responsible
university official:
evp and provost

acd-1605 – policy for creating, modifying, suspending or eliminating
academic programs
university of richmond | 2
policy statement:
acd-1605.1 – definitions
academic programs include degrees (including an undergraduate or graduate certificate) as well as majors,
minors, or concentrations (if the concentration is recorded on a student's transcript).
degree: a degree is the certification that is awarded by the university upon completion of a specific course
of study. for example, c.a.s (undergraduate certificate), g.c. (graduate certificate), b.a, b.s., b.s.b.a.,
m.b.a., ll.m, and j.d. are all degrees currently offered by the university. concentrations or majors within a
degree are not different degrees.
multiple schools: an academic program is considered to involve , impact, or affect multiple schools
(cross-school impact) if it incorporates courses from more than one school; if it impacts more than one
school as specified in the university faculty senate charter ; or if there is (or would be following the
creation or revision of a program) significant curricular overlap with a nother school . for example,
curricular overlap would exist if there were redundant courses offered at the same degree level in multiple
schools.
suspension of an academic program governed by sacscoc must have a clearly defined timeframe
(with a suspension start and end date) which cannot exceed five years (the time between accreditation
reviews). freezing admission to an academic program is the same as suspending a program.
elimination of an academic program: suspending a program indefinitely is the same as eliminating a
program, per sacscoc.
significant revision/significant modification: significant revision to an existing academic program is
defined as a significant change to the structure of the program; change affecting 25% or more of the courses
in the program; curricular change that requires additional resources (such as a faculty line) or facilities to
implement, beyond that which the school can provide within existing resources, routine classroom upgrades
or resources already allocated through the university budgeting process or dedicated philanthropy; and/or
change that would require a substantive change notification or request to sacscoc (see
https://sacscoc.org/app/uploads/2019/08/substantivechange.pdf
for more information).
acd-1605.2 – policy statement
the creation, suspension or elimination of an academic program must be approved with input from the faculty,
relevant dean(s), academic cabinet, and provost. significant revisions to an academic program also must be
approved with input from the faculty, relevant dean(s), academic cabinet, and provost. creation, suspension,
elimination or significant revision of academic programs involving multiple schools further require review and
recommendation from the faculty senate, per the faculty senate charter. the creation, suspension or
elimination of degree programs must be approved by the board of trustees.
approvals will be made according to the following process:
acd-1605.3 – approval process
a. initiating the process to create, modify, suspend or eliminate an academic program

acd-1605 – policy for creating, modifying, suspending or eliminating
academic programs
university of richmond | 3
faculty interested in creating a new academic program or significantly revising an existing program
should prepare a proposal for submission to the dean of the school in which the program will be
administratively housed and supported. cross-school programs must be situated in a school, generally
the one in which the principal faculty member who will coordinate the program is located. proposals to
suspend or eliminate a program will begin the process within the program's home school.
proposals for new cross-school programs or related to existing programs affecting more than one school
must also be submitted to the deans of other affected schools.
the dean must inform the office of institutional effectiveness that a recommendation to create,
modify, suspend or eliminate the program is being prepared, consistent with the university policy on
substantive change. (note: if the program to be suspended or eliminated is at an off-campus site
and is the only program offered at that site, then additional approval and documentation will be
required to close the site. in this case, consult with the university's sacscoc liaison for specific
instructions and documentation necessary in addition to the approvals required in this document.)
proposals to create a new academic program or significantly revise an existing program must adhere
to accreditation standards related to minimum required semester credit hours or equivalent units for
degree programs. (sacscoc principles of accreditation standard 9.2 program length)
b. approvals
the process for recommending creation, revision, suspension or elimination of an academic program
within each school is described in the faculty handbook. all school-based approvals must be
completed per the faculty handbook before moving to the next stage of approval. program
modifications that are not significant can be considered approved upon completion of the school-based
approval process.
once the proposal has been approved within all affected schools, the dean of the home school will
submit a letter of intent to the provost and include messages from deans of affected schools
conveying approval from their schools in the case of programs that involve multiple schools. in the
case of proposals to create new programs, documentation should also include copies of the faculty
proposal, the assessment plan outline with proposed curriculum map, and a preliminary faculty
credential roster (see exhibits 1 – 5).
the provost will consult with the academic cabinet and may request additional information from the
dean.
if the proposal includes the suspension or elimination of a program that may involve the dismissal of
tenured faculty, the faculty handbook, procedures for the discontinuance of an academic
department or program of instruction involving possible dismissal of tenured faculty, becomes
applicable at this stage of the process. the steps of program review and timeline outlined in the
faculty handbook related to the discontinuance of academic programs that are home to tenured
faculty are more rigorous than those for other types of program elimination, and all steps involving
departmental, school, senate, provost and board of trustee review and approval must be completed
according to the handbook; any steps required by this policy which are not also required by the

acd-1605 – policy for creating, modifying, suspending or eliminating
academic programs
university of richmond | 4
handbook must also be completed.
if the program involves multiple schools, the provost will convey a recommendation, informed by
consultation with academic cabinet, to the university academic programs committee (uapc), with
all relevant documentation of the proposal. the uapc will consider the proposal and make a
motion to the university faculty senate (ufs) for approval.
if a proposed program will not incorporate courses from more than one school and does not affect
another school then the proposal does not require review or recommendation from uapc or ufs.
proposals for new or significant revisions to single-school degrees will be sent to uapc for its
awareness; no action on a single-school matter is required. it is at this stage that uapc would
consult with the provost regarding the possible need for review under the multi-school process, if
uapc determined that the proposed new or revised degree would affect multiple schools as
specified in the faculty senate charter.
following approval by the school in the case of academic programs exclusive to one school, or the
university faculty (via faculty senate vote or full faculty vote, pursuant to the university faculty
senate charter) in the case of academic programs involving multiple schools, the proposal goes as a
recommendation to the provost.
if approved by the provost:
a. in the case of majors, minors, concentrations, or significant revisions to academic programs, the
provost will notify the academic and enrollment management committee of the board of
trustees.
b. in the case of a proposal to create, suspend, or eliminate a degree program, the provost will
recommend approval of that proposal to the academic and enrollment management committee
and the board of trustees.
following approval by the provost in the case of academic programs exclusive to one school, the
provost will notify the faculty senate.
after the proposed program change has been approved by the provost (or trustees for a new or
eliminated degree), the office of institutional effectiveness will notify, and if necessary, seek
approval from sacscoc. in addition to sacscoc, an individual school or program may need to
seek approval from the program accrediting body if applicable (e.g., aacsb, aba, caep).
proposals to create, suspend or eliminate a degree program must be approved by the board of
trustees prior to notifying sacscoc.
exhibits 7-10 provide flowcharts of the approval steps outlined in this policy
acd-1605–timeline
for new program implementation: in order to ensure sufficient time to review and seek necessary
approval of new programs, including accreditation approval, it may take up to two years following the
initial proposal to begin enrolling students in the new program. new programs usually begin in the fall
semester.

acd-1605 – policy for creating, modifying, suspending or eliminating
academic programs
university of richmond | 5
for suspending or eliminating programs: in order to ensure sufficient time to review and seek
necessary approval for suspending or eliminating existing programs, this action may require up to two
years to take effect; further, each program suspension or elimination may require an additional five active
program years to allow students to complete the program. the timeline will be shorter if there are no
students currently enrolled in the program. (note: per sacscoc and federal requirements, the
university cannot stop admitting students to a program prior to obtaining sacscoc approval.)
acd-1605.4 –documentation
all new academic program proposals will include the following components (exhibits 1-5):
1. a proposal to the dean of the appropriate school from a faculty body (working group,
committee, department, program, school)
2. a letter of intent from the dean of the appropriate school to the provost
3. an assessment plan outline
4. proposed curriculum and program map (for new degrees and majors only)
5. a preliminary faculty credential roster
proposals for significant revisions to existing programs will include a letter of intent from the dean of the
home school, modeled on exhibit 2. updated assessment plans and faculty credential information will be
provided if the extent of the changes warrant.
proposals for suspension or elimination of existing programs will include a letter of intent from the dean of
the appropriate school (exhibit 6).
each of these components is described in more detail on subsequent pages (exhibits 1-6).
acd-1605.5 – changes and modifications to this process
it is likely that the format, timeline, and review and approval processes for academic program changes will
need to modified or adjusted over time. any changes to the university-wide format, timeline, or review
process will be made after consultation with the appropriate faculty and administrative decision- making
bodies and will maintain the university's compliance with state, federal, and accrediting body regulations.
each school may change its review and approval process at any time in accordance with the processes
outlined in the faculty handbook. this document will be updated regularly to reflect review and approval
elements required by state, federal or accrediting body regulations.
acd-1605.6 – applicable regulations & accreditation standards
sacscoc principles of accreditation 14.2 substantive change
sacscoc principles of accreditation 9.2 program length
related policies:
faculty handbook
faculty senate charter

acd-1605 – policy for creating, modifying, suspending or eliminating
academic programs
university of richmond | 6
acd-9001 -- substantive change policy
acd-7201 – academic and professional preparation requirements for faculty
policy background:
policy created prior to 2013
policy revised 12/2013
policy reviewed by academic deans and faculty senate prior to approval on 04/13/2017
current policy reviewed by academic deans, president's cabinet, and faculty senate prior to approval on
05/17/2021
non-substantive revision january 2023 to include reference to required credit hour minimums
policy contacts:
evp and provost
director of institutional effectiveness and sacscoc liaison

e
xhibit 1
proposal from faculty to a school dean to establish a new academic program
the proposal should provide an overview of the new program including a description,
justification, and estimate of existing resources as well as additional resources needed to
launch and to sustain the program over time. the proposing faculty should consult with
appropriate individuals/offices as needed to complete each section.
the proposal should be structured in three parts to provide the following information:
1. description of the proposed new program
o name
o mission statement
o possible or confirmed partnerships with other areas as relevant;
e.g., other departments, programs, or schools
o requirements including courses as well as other academic and nonacademic
requirements. [a proposal for a new degree (including undergraduate or
graduate certificate) should also include specific information on admission
requirements.]
o name, title and department of coordinator and a brief explanation of their
academic or other qualifications relevant to the new program (not needed for
a new concentration)
2. justification for the new program
o explanation of how it fits into the school or university's educational mission
o explanation of external trends or needs in the program area as relevant
o estimate of potential student interest in the first five years of the program
3. estimate of resources required to develop and sustain a high quality program (to be
made in consultation with appropriate university offices).
o faculty positions
o library resources
o technology resources
o facilities (specialized classroom needs, lab space, office space, etc.)
o equipment
o financial aid (for new degree programs only)
o potential impact (positive or negative) on current programs
the proposal should be concise and should be accompanied by the completed assessment
plan outline (with curriculum map) and faculty roster in the materials submitted to the dean
for approval.

exhibit 2:
letter of intent from the dean of the appropriate school to the provost to establish a
new academic program
after the school has completed its review of the proposed new program, the dean will send
a letter to the provost indicating the school's support for the program. the letter of intent
can incorporate information from the faculty proposal or include the faculty proposal as an
attachment. however, it is expected that the dean's letter of intent will include more refined
estimates of the demand for the new program as well as the resources required to develop
and sustain the program. in addition, the letter will reflect input from the offices of
enrollment management, financial aid, business and finance, and university facilities
concerning the potential impact of the new program within each of these areas.
for cross-school programs, the deans of each of the schools involved will submit a letter
of intent to support the program. for single-school programs, the letter will comment as
to whether there is any overlap with curriculum in another school.

exhibit 3:
assessment plan outline for proposed new degree or major
proposed program information
academic program (major)
degree
department
school
contact person
name
title
department
e-mail address
extension
proposed program mission statement
proposed program learning outcomes
1.

exhibit 4:
assessment program outline: proposed curriculum and program map
use this map to list all of the courses that will be required in the proposed major and confirm
that the stated learning outcomes are in line with the proposed curriculum. please enter the
courses in the order that you expect students will typically complete them. for existing
courses, enter the course number.
for new courses, enter the course title and place an "x" in the new course column. under
each learning outcome, indicate the courses in which it is incorporated and how it is
incorporated by using the following codes: i-introduced in the course, r-reinforced, e-
emphasized.
course new
course
outcome 1 outcome 2 outcome 3
□
□
□
□
□
□
□
□
□
□

9
e
xhibit 5: preliminary faculty roster form
qualifications of full-time and part-time faculty
name of program:
type of program:
(e.g., degree, major, minor, concentration)
name and department of program coordinator:
school(s): date form completed:
1 2 3 4
faculty name
(ft/pt)
list the faculty who will be
teaching in the new program
and indicate whether the
faculty member is full- or part-
time. if new faculty will be
hired, use new for the name
and complete the rest of the
columns based on your
expectations for the position.
example: steig cederholm
(pt)
program
courses
include the course number and
title of the courses that will
make up the new program for
new and existing courses.
example: mus 390 music
composition
academic
degrees &
coursework
list the faculty member's
academic credentials
(including degree, field of
study, and institution) that
qualify them to teach the
courses listed in column 2. if
needed, list specific graduate
coursework.
example: bm (music
composition), university of
louisville
other
qualifications
& comments
complete this section only if the faculty
member does not have
sufficient academic credentials
to teach the courses in column
2. if completing this section,
only include information
related directly to the courses
in column 2.
example: formerly the
composer in residence for the atlanta symphony orchestra

exhibit 6:
letter of intent from the dean of the appropriate school to the provost to suspend or
eliminate an existing academic program
the letter should provide an overview of the reasoning and process for suspending or
ending the existing academic program. please consult with the appropriate
individuals/offices as needed to complete each section.
for cross-school programs, the deans of each of the schools involved will submit a letter of
support for the suspension/elimination. for single-school programs, the letter will comment
as to whether there is overlap with the curriculum of any other school.
the letter should be structured in four parts to provide the following information:
1. description of the program to be suspended or eliminated
o program name
o program mission statement
o name, title and department of program coordinator
o proposed suspension start and end dates (not needed for eliminating a program)
2. justification for suspending or eliminating the program
o explanation of why the program is being suspended or eliminated such as:
 lack of student interest
 changes in external trends or needs in the program area as relevant
 budgetary considerations
 faculty considerations
 other resource issues
 program quality issues
 strategic planning/university mission
3. potential impact (positive or negative) of suspending or eliminating the program
o description of the potential impact on current faculty (specify full-
time/part-time and tenure status)
o description of the potential impact on students currently enrolled in the program
 include the number and status of students currently in the
program and projections for completion
o description of the potential impact on prospective students/applicants
o description of the potential impact on current staff (specify full-time/part-time)
o description of the potential impact on resources (such as facilities, equipment, etc.)
o description of the anticipated impact on net tuition revenue
o description of the potential impact on other academic programs
(shared course offerings, shared instructional staff, shared resources,

general education, etc.)
4. teach-out plan
o detailed description of how currently enrolled students will be helped to
complete the program with minimal disruption or additional expense
 include a timeline for moving current students through program completion
 include specific course requirements and when and how they will be
offered to facilitate program

exhibit 7: approval process for adding/eliminating/significantly modifying majors/minors/concentrations involving one
school
school-based review &
approval process
proposal is shared with
institutional effectiveness
provost consults with
academic cabinet provost review
sacscoc &
program accreditor (where
necessary)
bot academic &
enrollment management
committee
department, program or
faculty committee or
working group submit
proposal
recommendation
approval
consultation
information
faculty senate

exhibit 8: approval process for adding/eliminating/significantly revising degrees involving one school
*uapc consultation not necessary for single-school degree eliminations
**board of trustee approval required for creation or elimination of degrees; significant revisions require inform aemc only
school-based review and
approval process
proposal shared with
institutional effectiveness
provost consults with
academic cabinet provost review
board of trustees**
sacscoc &
program accreditor
(when necessary)
department, program or
faculty committee or
working group submit
proposal
uapc consults to
affirm no multi-school
issues*
provost informs faculty
senate of degree
approval
recommendation
approval
consultation
information

exhibit 9: adding/eliminating majors/minors/concentrations or significant revisions to
academic programs involving multiple schools
department, program or
faculty committee or
working group submit
proposal
review and
approval process in
all affected schools
proposal is shared with
institutional effectiveness
provost review provost consults with
academic cabinet
uapc/faculty senate review
(per senate bylaws)
bot academic & enrollment
management committee
provost final approval
sacscoc &
program accreditor
(where necessary)
recommendation
approval
consultation
information

exhibit 10: adding/eliminating/ degrees involving multiple schools
recommendation
approval
consultation
information
department, program or
faculty committee or
working group submit
proposal
school-based
review and
approval process in
all affected schools
proposal is shared with
institutional effectiveness
provost review
uapc/faculty senate
review
(per senate bylaws)
provost final approval
board of trustees
sacscoc &
program accreditor
(when necessary)
provost consults with
academic cabinet