university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
as a non-profit institution, the university of richmond must exercise good stewardship of its charitable assets
and must ensure that those assets are being used to further the university's educational mission and its
strategic plan or other institutional priorities. as a neighbor and educational institution, the university also has
an interest in sustaining and enhancing its positive impact on the richmond region through strategic, focused,
and coordinated community engagement activities. while in furtherance of this interest it may from time to
time be warranted for the university to provide monetary support or cash donations to an organization, the
university's primary mode of community engagement is leveraging the institution's human resources and
intellectual capital in service to the city and the region. for these reasons, the university must carefully assess
requests from other non-profit organizations for cash contributions.
scope:
this policy addresses only direct monetary contributions or support and does not address the contribution of
time by students, faculty, or staff. it also does not address the contribution of university facilities as a
convening place for meetings by community organizations and other external non-profits or government
organizations.
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right
to elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
index:
gov-1005.1......policy statement
gov-1005.2......procedure
policy #: gov-1005 policy title: policy and procedure on monetary support and
cash donations
effective: 07/12/2024 responsible
office:
executive vice president and coo
date
amended:
07/12/2024
approval: board of trustees
replaces
policy dated:
07/18/2017 responsible
university
official:
evp/coo and savp/controller

gov-1005 – policy and procedure on monetary support and cash donations
university of richmond | 2
policy statement:
gov-1005.1 – policy
impermissible use of funds
except as provided in this policy, the university of richmond does not make cash donations to other non-
profit or governmental organizations. this prohibition on the use of university resources normally includes:
• direct cash donations to an organization, including, but not limited to donations in lieu of
honoraria/speaker fee for individuals speaking at a university event, participating in a class, or
otherwise performing a service for the university;
• sponsorship of dinners, tables, or events to benefit another organization; and
• any other use of university resources that would be considered a charitable donation under irs
regulations.
permissible use of university resources
while the university does not, in general, provide monetary assistance to other non-profit organizations, the
university is committed to being an engaged member of the greater richmond community and partner with
organizations across the metro area and within the academy. permissible use of university resources
include:
• the attendance by one or two students, staff, faculty, or administrators of the university at events
where there is a clear business purpose for the attendance. the cost of attendance at such events
may be paid from university budgets allocated for business meals and travel in accordance with
applicable policies;
• marketing at events or in publications or other venues in which part of the fee could be considered a
charitable donation. those fees may be paid from university budgets allocated for marketing
purposes and decisions about allocating funds for marketing may be made at the discretion of an
academic dean or vice president, who will report that intention to the evp/coo and accounts
payable in advance of committing to or initiating payment;
• membership fees for professional organizations in which it is important that the institution, a
school, or program be a member (e.g., ace, aals) or subscriptions or fees in exchange for access
to data or services (e.g., the phd project);
• payment of a reasonable fee to an entity for providing a service to the university in support of its
academic mission (e.g., an organization making a lab accessible to students or making available an
executive or staff member for a lecture or conversation with students); and
• modest memorial gifts made by the chaplaincy in instances in which flowers from the university
would normally be sent, but the family has indicated a strong preference for memorial gifts in lieu
of flowers.
such permissible uses of university resources outlined do not require approval. no category above (e.g.,
marketing or cost of attendance at events) is intended to include event sponsorship or table sponsorship or
the like at an event benefitting another institution or entity.
exceptions
from time to time, the university may receive a request for monetary support or a cash donation to a non-
profit or governmental organization that either furthers or is directly related to the university's mission, its
strategic plan, or other institutional goals. in such event, the request for monetary support or a cash donation
will be evaluated in accordance with the process set forth below. no one is authorized to commit university
resources in response to such a request without receiving approval from the executive vice president and

gov-1005 – policy and procedure on monetary support and cash donations
university of richmond | 3
coo (evp/coo) or his/her designee (e.g, the savp and controller). at his or her discretion, the
evp/coo may establish an annual cumulative limit on university resources, regardless of funding source,
available for the purposes outlined in this policy. the evp/coo will also identify or approve an appropriate
source for funds expended for the purposes outlined in this policy. if the dean or vp bringing forward a
request anticipates repetition of that request in the foreseeable future, where appropriate, the evp/coo may
make clear that approval pertains to anticipated future instances.
gov-1005.2 –procedure
procedure for approval of monetary support or cash donations
the procedure for seeking approval of an exception to this policy is as follows:
1. all requests (for which approval is sought) for monetary support, cash donation from the university
to a non-profit or governmental organization, or sponsorship of a table at a charitable function shall
first be referred to the relevant dean or vice president in the school or division in which the request
emanates, or such requests may originate with a dean, vice president, or executive vice president
(evp).
2. a dean, vice president, or evp shall assess such request to determine if the purpose of the proposed
support or donation is directly related to the university's mission, strategic plan, or other
institutional goals.
3. if the dean, vice president, or evp determines that the request is directly related to the university's
mission, strategic plan, or other institutional goals; is reasonable; and merits approval, he or she shall
refer the request to the evp/coo for approval, identifying with the request the proposed source of
funds that would be used for the payment.
4. the evp/coo shall review the request and if he or she determines that it is directly related to the
university's mission, strategic plan, or other institutional goals and is reasonable, he or she will
approve the request and an appropriate source of funds.
5. monetary support or donations approved through this process shall be paid solely from accounts
approved by the evp/coo as an appropriate source.
in the case of requests made directly to the office of the president for gifts or payments to non-profits, those
requests shall likewise be referred to evp/coo for consultation.
related policies:
no related policies
policy background:
policy established on 02/12/2009
reviewed and updated on 07/18/2017 and 10/24/2019
non-substantive updates to titles and departments approved on 07/12/2024
policy contacts:
evp and chief operating officer