university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
this policy provides clarity as to the benefits associated with emeritus status.
scope:
this policy applies to the university of richmond and all of its affiliates. as used in this policy, the term
"affiliates" means organizations or entities in which the university owns a controlling interest or has the right
to elect the majority of the entity's governing board.
index:
hrm-1006.1 .....definitions
hrm-1006.2 .....policy statement
policy statement:
hrm-1006.1 – definitions
retirement: a person is considered to be retired or a retiree for purposes of this policy if they terminate
employment with the university after meeting all of the university's eligibility requirements for retirement.
hrm-1006.2 – policy statement
as outlined in the faculty handbook, certain faculty who retire from the university after providing long and
exceptional service to the university may be eligible for emeritus status. emeritus status may only be granted
by the board of trustees.
policy #: hrm-1006 policy title: policy on emeritus status
effective: 09/22/2023 responsible office: office of the provost
date
approved:
09/22/2023
approval: executive vice president and provost
replaces
policy dated:
02/04/2010 responsible
university official:
executive vice president and provost

hrm-1006 – policy on emeritus status
university of richmond | 2
the granting of emeritus status to employees by the board of trustees provides the holder the right to use the
title bestowed. emeritus status does not grant the holder any other university benefits. retiree benefits are not
linked to emeritus status and are governed by the university's retirement policies.
in rare instances, emeritus status may be granted by the board of trustees to an employee who does not meet
the criteria for retirement from the university. in such cases, emeritus status provides only the right to the title
bestowed; it does not confer any retiree benefits.
related policies:
faculty phased retirement policy
faculty early retirement policy
staff and faculty regular retirement policy
faculty handbook
policy background
this policy clarifies and codifies the distinction between emeritus status and retiree status, consistent with the
university's retirement policies and longstanding practice.
policy was reviewed by president's cabinet and academic deans prior to approval on 9/19/2023.
policy contacts:
executive vice president and provost
vice president and secretary to the board