university of richmond | 1
university of richmond
policy manual
purpose:
the university of richmond is committed to protecting student privacy for students enrolled in distance
education courses.
scope:
this policy applies to the education records of all current and former students of the university of richmond.
faculty, staff and students of the university are expected to comply with this policy.
index:
acd-2005.1 ......definitions
acd-2005.2 ......policy statement
acd-2005.3…..applicable regulations & accreditation standards
policy statement:
acd-2005.1 – definitions
student
any person who attends or has attended the university of richmond whether physically present on a campus
or online and regarding whom the university maintains education records.
policy #: acd-2005
policy title: policy on protecting student privacy in distance
education
effective: 1/15/2023 responsible office: registrar's office
date
approved:
1/10/2023 approval: evp and provost
replaces
policy dated:
responsible
university official:
university registrar

acd-2005 - policy on protecting student privacy in distance education
university of richmond | 2
acd-2005.2 – policy
the university is committed to protecting student privacy, regardless of the modality of the course in which a
student is enrolled. university policies regarding student privacy and information security that apply generally
to students and courses apply without regard to teaching modality; those privacy and information security
policies apply to all students and courses, including distance education courses.
student privacy in online settings and distance education courses are protected through the use of secure user
names and passwords and the university's use of secure technologies and multi-factor identification to access
those technologies.
university personnel are required to follow university and ferpa guidelines for sharing student educational
record information with other faculty, staff, parents, or others outside of the university. in addition to adhering
to privacy protections that apply to all students (including the university's ferpa policy), faculty teaching
distance education courses must:
• use the university's lms (blackboard) to teach all distance education courses in order to ensure the
security of student course material, communication, student work submission, and grades. instructors are
required to use blackboard to post course material, send announcements, facilitate collaboration among
students, collect student work, deliver tests and quizzes, and post grades.
• use the university's secure bannerweb site to report student grades.
• use blackboard or the university's email system for all official, confidential communication such as
providing feedback on student work, releasing grade information to students, etc.
• keep student work, scores, or grades confidential. students in the course must not have access to other
students' work or grades.
• keep blackboard or ur email account information secure, not share login information with anyone,
give anyone unauthorized access to the blackboard course or assign a student the role of instructor or
graduate assistant in blackboard.
• ensure that any other form of communication or collaboration software used in the class conforms to
university standards for protecting student privacy
at the discretion of the faculty, any student enrolled in a distance education course may be required to
undertake a video interview or exam, when a photo id will be required.
acd-2005.3 – applicable regulations & accreditation standards
family educational rights and privacy act (ferpa) (20 u.s.c. § 1232g; 34 cfr part 99)
code of virginia: § 23.1-405. student records and personal information; social media
sacscoc standard 10.6
related policies:
acd-2004: privacy of education records (ferpa) policy
irm 2001: acceptable use policy
irm 3002: official university communications policy

acd-2005 - policy on protecting student privacy in distance education
university of richmond | 3
irm 4001: password policy
irm 4004: data security policy
irm 4006: general data privacy regulation (gdpr) privacy notice
policy background:
longstanding practice codified in policy library january 2023.
policy contacts:
university registrar, registrar's office
director of information security, network services