university of richmond
statement on free expression
approved december 17, 2020 by the board of trustees
ins
titutional mission
the unive
rsity of richmond is committed to the production and dissemination of knowledge
through open inquiry and "the promotion of a vibrant intellectual community that encourages
thoughtful disagreement and the vigorous exchange of ideas." 1 the university believes that
"respectful engagement with a broad diversity of perspectives and experiences [is] essential to
intellectual growth,"2 and that members of the university community can build understanding and
empathy by engaging with different points of view. the university's commitment to fostering a
diverse, inclusive community demands an equally strong commitment to freedom of expression.
the ability to speak freely, debate vigorously, and engage deeply with differing viewpoints is
essential to the university's mission of advancing knowledge and preparing students to flourish in
a complex world. freedom of expression enables the university community —students, faculty,
and staff— to express their deeply held convictions, opinions, ideas, and matters of conscience
and engage in vigorous debate, criticism, and counter-speech.
right
s of free expression
the unive
rsity promotes and protects the freedom of expression for all members of its community.
at the university of richmond, speech may not be suppressed, nor speakers disinvited, simply
because the ideas put forth are thought by some or even by most members of the university
community to be unwelcome or deeply offensive. the university recognizes that on occasion some
members of the community may strongly disagree with the speech of others, or may view the
expression of certain ideas as harmful. on these occasions, it is for the members of the university
community to respond by openly and vigorously contesting the ideas that they oppose, not by
seeking to suppress speech. t he broad protection of freedom of expression is particularly
necessary for speakers and messages that challenge authority or the status quo, which frequently
have been the target of censorship efforts.
limit
s of free expression
freedom
of expression at the university of richmond is not without limits. the university may
restrict expression that incites imminent lawless action, falsely defames a specific individual, or
which targets a specific individual or individuals with threats or harassment. in addition, the
university may reasonably regulate the time, place, and manner of expression to ensure that it does
not disrupt classes, operations, or university-sponsored events. but these narrow exceptions must
never be used in a manner that is inconsistent with the university's foundational commitment to a
completely free and open discussion of ideas.
1 the university of richmond's code of organizational ethics and integrity, p.2 (values of the university; pursuit
of knowledge).
2 the university of richmond's code of organizational ethics and integrity, p.2 (values of the university;
inclusivity and equity).

rights of non-disruptive protest
fr
eedom of expression necessarily includes the freedom to engage in non- disruptive counter -
speech or protest. members of the university community are free to contest ideas expressed on
campus and to criticize speakers who have been invited to present their views. in so protesting,
however, members of this community may not obstruct or otherwise interfere with the freedom of
others to invite speakers or engage in their own permitted acts of expression. the university of
richmond is committed not only to promoting the lively and fearless freedom of debate and
deliberation, but also to protecting that freedom when others attempt to restrict it. it is an essential
part of the university's educational mission to educate members of the university community
about these fundamental principles, and to foster the community's ability to engage in debate and
deliberation in an effective and responsible manner.
ri
ghts of the university
alth
ough committed to the principles of academic freedom an d freedom of expression, the
university itself need not remain neutral in regard to ideas or beliefs expressed on campus. the
university enjoys its own freedom to respond or communicate the institution's values and
principles.